No, our generals infatuation is out of control. His eyes used to glow with pride when he reviewed his troops. Now his eyes devote themselves exclusively to a certain brown-skinned face. His heart used to burst the buckles on his breastplate in great fights, but now hes lost all temperance and dedicates his heart to satisfying the lust of an Egyptian whore.	Nay, but this dotage of our generals Oerflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes, That oer the files and musters of the war Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn The office and devotion of their view Upon a tawny front. His captains heart, Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper And is become the bellows and the fan To cool a gypsys lust.
	Take but good note, and you shall see in him The triple pillar of the world transformed Into a strumpets fool. Behold and see.
If what you feel is really love, tell me how much.	If it be love indeed, tell me how much.
It would be a pretty stingy love if it could be counted and calculated.	Theres beggary in the love that can be reckoned.
I want to measure the extent of your love, to see how far it stretches.	Ill set a bourn how far to be beloved.
Then you would have to go beyond heaven, beyond earth.	Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.
I have news from Rome, my good lord.	News, my good lord, from Rome.
Which irritaties me. Give me a summary.	Grates me, the sum.
No, listen to it, Antony. Perhaps FulviaFulvia is Marc Antonys wife.Fulvia is angry with you. Who knows, maybe the baby-faced CaesarOctavius Caesar was only in his twenties at this time, about twenty years younger than Antony.baby-faced Caesar has orders for you: Do this, do that; conquer that kingdom, liberate this one. Do it or well condemn you.	Nay, hear them, Antony. Fulvia perchance is angry. Or who knows If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent His powerful mandate to you, Do this, or this. Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that. Perform t, or else we damn thee.
What, my love?	How, my love?
Maybe? No, most likely. You cant stay here any longer. Caesar has sent your dismissal, so pay attention, Antony. Wheres Fulvias summonsexcuse me, I should have said Caesars. Or do Fulvia and Caesar both beckon you back to Rome? Call in the messengers and well find out. As surely as I am the queen of Egypt, Antony, youre blushing, which means youre Caesars servant. Or that that bitch Fulvia still has the power to humiliate you. Call the messengers!	Perchance? Nay, and most like. You must not stay here longer. Your dismission Is come from Caesar. Therefore hear it, Antony. Wheres Fulvias process? Caesars, I would sayboth? Call in the messengers. As I am Egypts queen, Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine Is Caesars homager. Else so thy cheek pays shame When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
Let Rome be washed away in the TiberRome was built on the river Tiber.Let Rome be washed away in the Tiber and let the great empire fall. My place is here. Kingdoms are only dirt. The soil feeds animals as well as people, so how does having a kingdom separate humans from beasts? The noblest thing is to do what were doing, particularly when the couple is as well matched as we are. I demand that the world admit we are the perfect couple or else suffer the consequences.	Let Rome in Tiber melt and the wide arch Of the ranged empire fall. Here is my space. Kingdoms are clay. Our dungy earth alike Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life Is to do thus, when such a mutual pair And such a twain can do t, in which I bind, On pain of punishment, the world to weet We stand up peerless.
(to herself) What an enormous lie! Why did he marry Fulvia if he didnt love her? Ill pretend to be a fool and believe him. Hell never change.	Excellent falsehood! Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her? Ill seem the fool I am not. Antony Will be himself.
(overhearing the last sentence) Unless he is moved and inspired by Cleopatra. Now, since we love the feeling of being in love, lets not spoil the mood with serious discussion. We shouldnt spend a minute without some kind of amusement. What shall we do tonight?	But stirred by Cleopatra. Now, for the love of Love and her soft hours, Lets not confound the time with conference harsh. Theres not a minute of our lives should stretch Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?
Meet with the ambassadors.	Hear the ambassadors.
Shame on you, stubborn Queen! Everything you do is attractivescolding, laughing, cryingevery emotion seems admirable when you express it. I wont see any messengers but yours. Tonight well wander through the streets and observe the people. Come, my Queen. Thats what you wanted to do last night. (to the MESSENGER ) Dont talk to us.	Fie, wrangling Queen! Whom every thing becomesto chide, to laugh, To weep, whose every passion fully strives To make itself, in thee, fair and admired! No messenger but thine, and all alone Tonight well wander through the streets and note The qualities of people. Come, my Queen, Last night you did desire it.(to the MESSENGER ) Speak not to us.
Does Antony have so little respect for Caesar?	Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?
Sir, sometimes hes like a different person, a person who cant measure up to the former Antony.	Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony He comes too short of that great property Which still should go with Antony.
Im sad to say this confirms the stories being told about him in Rome, which I had taken to be lies. Well, Ill hope things change for the better soon. Have a good night!	I am full sorry That he approves the common liar, who Thus speaks of him at Rome, but I will hope Of better deeds tomorrow. Rest you happy!
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almost the most consummate Alexas, wheres the fortuneteller you recommended so highly to the Queen? Oh, I only wish I knew the name of that husband you said he predicted will have a cheating wife!	Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almost most absolute Alexas, wheres the soothsayer that you praised so to th Queen? Oh that I knew this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns with garlands!
(calling) Fortuneteller!	Soothsayer!
What can I do for you?	Your will?
(to ALEXAS ) Is this the man you recommended? (to the FORTUNETELLER ) Are you the man who knows the future?	(to ALEXAS ) Is this the man? (to SOOTHSAYER ) Is t you, sir, that know things?
I can understand a few of natures infinite secrets.	In natures infinite book of secrecy A little I can read.
(to CHARMIAN ) Give him your hand to read.	(to CHARMIAN )Show him your hand.
(to the servants) Bring the dessert in right away, and make sure theres enough wine to toast Cleopatras health.	(to servants within) Bring in the banquet quickly. Wine enough Cleopatras health to drink.
(giving her hand to the FORTUNETELLER ) Kind sir, give me a good fortune.	(giving hand to SOOTHSAYER ) Good sir, give me good fortune.
I dont make fortunes; I only see them.	I make not, but foresee.
Then see a good one for me.	Pray, then, foresee me one.
Your beauty will be even greater than it is now.	You shall be yet far fairer than you are.
(to the others) He means Ill get fat.	(to the others) He means in flesh.
No, he means youll use makeup when youre old.	No, you shall paint when you are old.
May my wrinkles forbid that!	Wrinkles forbid!
Dont joke about his predictions. Pay attention.	Vex not his prescience. Be attentive.
Quiet!	Hush!
You will love more than you are loved.	You shall be more beloving than beloved.
Where is he?	Where is he?
I havent seen him recently.	I did not see him since.
(to ALEXAS ) Find out where he is, whos with him, and what hes doing. Dont tell him I sent you. If hes sad, tell him Im dancing. If hes happy, say that Ive suddenly taken sick. Hurry, and come back.	(to ALEXAS ) See where he is, whos with him, what he does. I did not send you. If you find him sad, Say I am dancing. If in mirth, report That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.
Madam, I think if you love him so much, you arent using the best way to get him to reciprocate.	Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly, You do not hold the method to enforce The like from him.
What should I do that Im not doing?	What should I do I do not?
Always give him his way. Never contradict him.	In each thing give him way. Cross him in nothing.
You advise me like a fool. Thats the way to lose him.	Thou teachest like a fool the way to lose him.
Dont push him too far. I wish youd be patient. We come to hate that which controls us.	Tempt him not so too far. I wish, forbear. In time we hate that which we often fear.
	
I am sick and sullen.	I am sick and sullen.
Im sorry to have to say this	I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose
Help me away from here, dear Charmian! I shall faint. I wont be able to go on this way much longer. Human nature isnt built to withstand this.	Help me away, dear Charmian! I shall fall. It cannot be thus long. The sides of nature Will not sustain it.
Now youll see, Lepidus, that I dont disdain our noble ally because of a personal whim. Heres the news from Alexandra: Antony fishes, drinks, and celebrates all night. Hes become as frivolous and self-indulgent as PtolemyPtolemy was Pharaoh of Egypt and Cleopatras husband, now dead. (He was also her younger brother.)Ptolemys queen, Cleopatra. He rarely attends to his duties or acknowledges he has partners to be considered. Heres a man who is the epitome of all the vices known to man.	You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know, It is not Caesars natural vice to hate Our great competitor. From Alexandria This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes The lamps of night in revel; is not more manlike Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall find there A man who is th abstract of all faults That all men follow.
I cant believe there could be enough vice in the world to outshine all the good in him. His faults stand out because they must be compared to all his virtues, like stars that shine brightly against the dark night sky. Theyre more likely to be the result of inherited weakness than independent choice.	I must not think there are Evils enough to darken all his goodness. His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven, More fiery by nights blackness, hereditary Rather than purchased, what he cannot change Than what he chooses.
Youre too forgiving. Lets say, for arguments sake, that its not improper to fool around with Ptolemys wife, or to trade a kingdom for a joke. That its fine to engage in drinking matches with inferiors, or stumble drunkenly through the streets in the middle of the day, or get into fist fights with sweaty servants. Even if we said that this behavior suits himthough only a man with a perfect character could avoid being disgraced by such anticstheres no excuse for the extra work weve had to take on while hes been off amusing himself. If hes been spending his leisure time in lustful pursuits, then hell be punished with venereal diseases, and thats his business. But hes wasting time and resources vital to our cause and endangering both his position and ours. He should be chastised, like any boy who knows whats right but chooses to satisfy his desires regardless.	You are too indulgent. Lets grant, it is not Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy, To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit And keep the turn of tippling with a slave, To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet With knaves that smell of sweat. Say this becomes him As his composure must be rare indeed Whom these things cannot blemishyet must Antony No way excuse his foils when we do bear So great weight in his lightness. If he filled His vacancy with his voluptuousness, Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones Call on him for t. But to confound such time That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud As his own state and ours, tis to be chid As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge, Pawn their experience to their present pleasure And so rebel to judgment.
Charmian!	Charmian!
Madam?	Madam?
Ah, give me some mandragoranarcotic syrupmandragora to drink.	Ha, ha! Give me to drink mandragora.
Why, madam?	Why, madam?
So I can sleep away the time while my Antony is gone.	That I might sleep out this great gap of time My Antony is away.
You think about him too much.	You think of him too much.
Thats treason!	Oh, tis treason!
I hope not, Madam.	Madam, I trust, not so.
Eunuch! Mardian!	Thou, eunuch Mardian!
What can I do for your highness?	Whats your highness pleasure?
I dont want to hear you sing. Im not interested in anything a eunuch can do. Its a good thing for you that, being castrated, you can better concentrate on my needs. Do you have desires?	Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure In aught an eunuch has. Tis well for thee That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
Yes, dear madam.	Yes, gracious madam.
Indeed?	Indeed?
Well, not in deed, madam, since I cant do anything unchaste. But I do have intense passionsand I do think about what Venus did with MarsVenus, goddess of love, and Mars, god of war, were legendary lovers.what Venus did with Mars.	Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing But what indeed is honest to be done. Yet have I fierce affections, and think What Venus did with Mars.
Oh, Charmian, where do you think he is now? Is he standing or sitting? Or is he walking? Or is he on his horse? Oh, how fortunate that horse is to have Antony on him. Do well, horse. Do you know whom it is you carry? A man who carries responsibility for a third of the world on his shoulders. Hes speaking now, or perhaps hes whispering, Wheres my serpent of the Nile? For thats his pet name for me. Im killing myself with this provocative speculation... Are you thinking about me? Even though Ive been darkened by the sun and wrinkled with age? Caesar, with your broad forehead, when you were alive, I was the perfect young consort for a king. And powerful Pompey used to stare at me as if he were frozen in time.Referring to two previous lovers, Julius Caesar and Gneius Pompey (son of Pompey the Great and elder brother of Sextus Pompeius).I was the perfect young consort for a king. And powerful Pompey used to stare at me as if he were frozen in time.	O Charmian, Where thinkst thou he is now? Stands he or sits he? Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse? O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony! Do bravely, horse, for wottst thou whom thou movst? The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm And burgonet of men. Hes speaking now, Or murmuring Wheres my serpent of old Nile? For so he calls me. Now I feed myself With most delicious poison. Think on me, That am with Phoebus amorous pinches black And wrinkled deep in time. Broad-fronted Caesar, When thou wast here above the ground, I was A morsel for a monarch. And great Pompey Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow. There would he anchor his aspect, and die With looking on his life.
If the great gods are just, they will help the most honest men.	If the great gods be just, they shall assist The deeds of justest men.
You should know, noble Pompey, that although the gods may delay action, that doesnt mean they will necessarily refuse their help.	Know, worthy Pompey, That what they do delay, they not deny.
But while we pray and wait for that help, the cause we petition for may be lost.	Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays The thing we sue for.
Sometimes we dont know whats best for us and ask for things that may harm us. In that case, the wise gods deny our prayers for our own good.	We, ignorant of ourselves, Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers Deny us for our good, so find we profit By losing of our prayers.
Ill do well. The people are on my side, and Im in charge of the sea. My forces are growing, and everything I know tells me its all coming together. Mark Antony is at dinner in Egypt and wont be going outside to make war. Caesar loses supporters wherever he raises money. Lepidus flatters both of them, as they flatter him, but he doesnt love them, and they dont love him.	I shall do well. The people love me, and the sea is mine. My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope Says it will come to th full. Mark Antony In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both, Of both is flattered, but he neither loves, Nor either cares for him.
Caesar and Lepidus are organizing their military operation. They have a massive army.	Caesar and Lepidus Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.
Where did you hear this? Its not true.	Where have you this? Tis false.
Good Enobarbus, you would be doing a very good thing if you advised your captain to speak calmly and quietly.	Good Enobarbus, tis a worthy deed, And shall become you well, to entreat your captain To soft and gentle speech.
I will advise him to speak as he usually does. If Caesar makes him mad, let Antony stand tall and speak as loudly as Mars, the god of war. By Jupiter, if I were Antony, I wouldnt shave my beard today. Id leave it long and dare Caesar to insult me by pulling on it, just so I could fight him.	I shall entreat him To answer like himself. If Caesar move him, Let Antony look over Caesars head And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter, Were I the wearer of Antonios beard, I would not shave t today.
This is not the time for dwelling on personal grievances.	Tis not a time for private stomaching.
Its always appropriate to deal with matters as they arise.	Every time serves for the matter that is then born in t.
But major issues must come before minor ones.	But small to greater matters must give way.
Not if the minor ones come up first.	Not if the small come first.
You speak out of passion, but I beg you not to stir things up. Here comes the noble Antony.	Your speech is passion. But pray you stir No embers up. Here comes the noble Antony.
And there comes Caesar.	And yonder, Caesar.
(to VENTIDIUS ) If we can come to an agreement here, well move on to Parthia. Listen, Ventidius.	(to VENTIDIUS ) If we compose well here, to Parthia. Hark, Ventidius.
(to MAECENAS ) I dont know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.	(to MECAENAS ) I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.
(to OCTAVIA ) There will be times when my duties and responsibilities take me away from you.	(to OCTAVIA ) The world and my great office will sometimes Divide me from your bosom.
And I will spend our time apart on my knees, praying for you.	All which time Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers To them for you.
(to CAESAR ) Good night, sir. My Octavia, dont believe everything you hear about me. I havent always lived a conventional life, but the future will be by the book. Good night, dear lady. (to CAESAR ) Good night, sir.	(to CAESAR ) Good night, sir.My Octavia, Read not my blemishes in the worlds report. I have not kept my square, but that to come Shall all be done by th rule. Good night, dear lady. (to CAESAR ) Good night, sir.
Good night.	Good night.
Now, sirrahterm of address for a person of lower statussirrah, I hear you wish you were back in Egypt.	Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?
I wish I had never left Egypt and that you had never come to Egypt.	Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither.
Tell me why, if you can.	If you can, your reason?
Its a feeling, but nothing I can put into words. But you had better get back to Egypt again.	I see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue. But yet hie you to Egypt again.
Tell me who shall have the better luck, Caesar or me?	Say to me whose fortunes shall rise higher, Caesars or mine?
Caesar. So youd better not stay with him, Antony. Your guardian angel is noble, courageous, significant, and unmatched when Caesars not around. But when you are with him, your angel is weakened and easily frightened. Thats why there must be space between you.	Caesars. Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side. Thy dmonthat thy spirit which keeps theeis Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable Where Caesars is not. But near him thy angel Becomes afeard, as being oerpowered. Therefore Make space enough between you.
Dont spend any more time here. Go tell your generals to hurry their preparations.	Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you, hasten Your generals after.
Sir, well follow as soon as Mark Antony kisses Octavia good-bye.	Sir, Mark Antony Will een but kiss Octavia, and well follow.
Good-bye then, until the time I see you dressed in your battle gear, which will suit you both very well.	Till I shall see you in your soldiers dress, Which will become you both, farewell.
According to my reckoning, well get to Mt. Misena before you, Lepidus.	We shall, As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount Before you, Lepidus.
Youre taking a shorter route. My plans take me a roundabout way. Youll get there two days before me.	Your way is shorter. My purposes do draw me much about. Youll win two days upon me.
Good luck, sir.	Sir, good success.
Farewell.	Farewell.
Play me some music. Music feeds the melancholy moods of us lovers.	Give me some music. Music, moody food Of us that trade in love.
Musicians, come in!	The music, ho!
Never mind. Lets play billiards. Play with me, Charmian.	Let it alone. Lets to billiards. Come, Charmian.
My arm is sore. Youll have a better game with Mardian.	My arm is sore. Best play with Mardian.
Playing with a eunuch is the same as playing with a woman. Will you play with me, sir?	As well a woman with an eunuch played As with a woman.Come, youll play with me, sir?
Ill do my best, madam.	As well as I can, madam.
When a person tries in good faith, even if he fails he cannot be blamed. I dont want to play now. Give me my fishing rod. Well go to the river. With my music playing in the background, Ill lure fish. My hook will go through their slimy jaws and as I pull them up Ill imagine each one is Antony. Ill say, Aha! I caught you!	And when good will is showed, though t come too short, The actor may plead pardon. Ill none now. Give me mine angle. Well to th river. There, My music playing far off, I will betray Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up Ill think them every one an Antony And say, Aha! Youre caught.
It was funny when you and Antony bet on who could catch the first fish. You had a diver put a salted fish on his hook. He was so excited as he hurried to pull it in!	Twas merry when You wagered on your angling, when your diver Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he With fervency drew up.
That time? Oh, there were so many fun times. I would play some trick on him and laugh until he lost his patience. Then, that night, I would laugh with him while we made love until he was patient again. Then by nine in the morning I would have him so drunk I could dress him in my clothes while I wore the sword he used at the famous battle of Philippi.	That timeOh, times! I laughed him out of patience, and that night I laughed him into patience. And next morn, Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed, Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst I wore his sword Philippan.
I have your hostages and you have mine. Lets talk before we fight.In order to conduct negotiations in safety, warring sides exchanged important persons and held the hostages until negotiations were complete.I have your hostages and you have mine. Lets talk before we fight.	Your hostages I have, so have you mine, And we shall talk before we fight.
Its proper that we speak first, which is why we sent our proposals ahead of us for your consideration. If youve had time to think over these points, let us know whether they will relieve your frustration. If yes, then a lot of brave young men can return to Sicily who would otherwise die here.	Most meet That first we come to words, and therefore have we Our written purposes before us sent, Which, if thou hast considered, let us know If twill tie up thy discontented sword And carry back to Sicily much tall youth That else must perish here.
I address the three of you, the sole rulers of this world and the main arbiters of the gods will. I dont know why my fathers death shouldnt be avenged, since he has a son and friends to do it. You avenged Julius Caesars death at Philippi, where his ghost haunted his killer, Brutus. Why did Cassius conspire against Caesar? And why did the honorable, well-intentioned Brutus and the others, men devoted to the ideal of freedom, assassinate Caesar? They didnt want one man to be king in Rome. And thats why Ive built my navy, which is so huge that the weight of the ships makes the sea foam with anger. I will punish Rome for her ingratitude toward my noble father.	To you all three, The senators alone of this great world, Chief factors for the gods: I do not know Wherefore my father should revengers want, Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar, Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted, There saw you laboring for him. What was t That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what Made the all-honored, honest Roman Brutus, With the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom, To drench the Capitol, but that they would Have one man but a man? And that is it Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden The angered ocean foams, with which I meant To scourge th ingratitude that despiteful Rome Cast on my noble father.
Heres where theyll end up, on the floor. Some of them are leaning already. It wont take much for them to fall over.	Here theyll be, man. Some o their plants are ill-rooted already. The least wind i th world will blow them down.
Lepidus is red in the face.	Lepidus is high-colored.
They made him drink the leftover wine usually given to the poor.	They have made him drink alms-drink.
Their various personalities grate on one another. Lepidus cries, No more arguing! and then when they agree he resigns himself to drink.	As they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out, No more, reconciles them to his entreaty and himself to th drink.
Which goes on to impede his judgment.	But it raises the greater war between him and his discretion.
Thats what happens when you partner with great men but lack their power. Id rather carry a reed that obviously cant protect me than a sword I cannot lift.	Why, this it is to have a name in great mens fellowship. I had as lief have a reed that will do me no service as a partisan I could not heave.
To be so unimportant in the company of important men is like having a face without any eyes.	To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in t, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.
This is how they do it, sir: they measure the depth of the Nile, according to certain marks made on the walls of the Pyramid. They know by those measurements if there will be famine or plenty. The higher the Nile flows, the better the harvest. As the river ebbs, the farmer scatters his seeds on the remaining silt. The harvest comes shortly after that.	Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o th Nile By certain scales i th Pyramid. They know By th height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth Or foison follow. The higher Nilus swells The more it promises. As it ebbs, the seedsman Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, And shortly comes to harvest.
Now Ive paid you back, Parthia, and gotten revenge for Marcus Crassus death. Carry King OrodesOrodes was King of Parthia and father of Pacorus. He assassinated Marcus Crassus, a member of the first Roman triumvirate.King Orodes son at the front of our army, so all the Parthians will knowOrodes, Pacorus pays for Marcus Crassus!	Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus death Make me revenger. Bear the Kings sons body Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes, Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
Noble Ventidius, while your sword is still warm with the blood of slain Parthians, why not finish the job? The Parthians retreat. Go after them. Chase them down if you have to track them through Media, MesopotamiaMedia and Mesopotamia were countries bordering ParthiaMedia, Mesopotamia, or any other places they may go to hide. Then our great general, Antony, will commend you.	Noble Ventidius, Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm, The fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media, Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither The routed fly. So thy grand captain, Antony, Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and Put garlands on thy head.
Oh, Silius, Silius, Ive done enough. A subordinate may exceed his authority. You must understand, Silius, that its better to leave something undone than achieve too much fame in your superiors absence. Caesar and Antony have always achieved more by delegating authority to their officers than by leading their troops in person. Sossius, an officer that held the same position in Syria as I do here, achieved great distinction very quickly but lost Antonys support as a result. A man who achieves more in war than his captain does becomes his captains rival. Ambition is a good quality in a soldier, but it proves detrimental rather than beneficial when used to surpass his superiors. I could do more to help Antony, but to do so would insult him. And by insulting him, I would lose credit for the good I have done him already.	O Silius, Silius, I have done enough. A lower place, note well, May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius: Better to leave undone than by our deed Acquire too high a fame when him we serves away. Caesar and Antony have ever won More in their officer than person. Sossius, One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant, For quick accumulation of renown, Which he achieved by th minute, lost his favor. Who does i th wars more than his captain can Becomes his captains captain; and ambition, The soldiers virtue, rather makes choice of loss Than gain which darkens him. I could do more to do Antonius good, But twould offend him, and in his offense Should my performance perish.
Did the brothers-in-law leave?	What, are the brothers parted?
They finished their business with Pompey, and Pompey has left. Now the three triumvirs are putting their official seals on the treaty. Octavia weeps at the thought of leaving Rome. Caesar is in a sober mood. And Menas reports that Lepidus has been hungover since Pompeys party.	They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone. The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus, Since Pompeys feast, as Menas says, is troubled With the greensickness.
That Lepidus is an elegant man.A pun: lepidus means elegant in Latin.That Lepidus is an elegant man.	Tis a noble Lepidus.
Hes a stylish man. And how he loves Caesar!	A very fine one. Oh, how he loves Caesar!
Yes, but how he adores Mark Antony!	Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
Caesar? Hes a god of a man.Enobarbus and Agrippa mock Lepidus excessive flattery.Hes a god of a man.	Caesar? Why, hes the Jupiter of men.
Then whats Antony? A god of a god?	Whats Antony? The god of Jupiter.
Are you talking about Caesar? Hes without equal!	Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!
Oh, Antony! Oh, you phoenixmythical bird, symbol of immortalityphoenix!	O Antony, O thou Arabian bird!
If you want to praise Caesar, just say his namethats all the praise thats necessary.	Would you praise Caesar, say Caesar. Go no further.
He certainly flattered them both with extravagant compliments.	Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
He loves Caesar best, but he also loves Antony. Oh! No one can describe or fathom Lepidus love for Antony! Hearts cannot think it, tongues cannot speak it, meas-urements cannot calculate it, scribes cannot write it, bards cannot sing it, and poets cannot make verses about it. But when it comes to Caesar, Lepidus love approaches the awestruck wonder of a worshipper.	But he loves Caesar best; yet he loves Antony. Hoo! Hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot Think, speak, cast, write, sing, numberhoo! His love to Antony. But as for Caesar, Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
He loves them both.	Both he loves.
They are his dung, and he their beetle.	They are his shards, and he their beetleShard-beetles make their home in dung heaps.their beetle.
Where is that messenger?	Where is the fellow?
Hes afraid to come in.	Half afeard to come.
Oh, come on.Come here, sir.	Go to, go to.Come hither, sir.
Gracious Queen, even Herod of Judea wouldnt dare look at you unless you were in a good mood.	Good majesty, Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you But when you are well pleased.
Ill have Herods head chopped off! But now that Antonys gone, who will do it for me? (to MESSENGER ) Come closer.	That Herods head Ill have! But how? When Antony is gone, Through whom I might command it? (to MESSENGER ) Come thou near.
Most formidable Queen!	Most gracious majesty!
Did you see Octavia?	Didst thou behold Octavia?
Yes, revered Queen.	Ay, dread Queen.
Where?	Where?
In Rome, Madam. I saw her face as she walked with her brother and Mark Antony.	Madam, in Rome. I looked her in the face, and saw her led Between her brother and Mark Antony.
Is she as tall as I am?	Is she as tall as me?
She is not, madam.	She is not, madam.
Did you hear her speak? Is her voice pitched high or low?	Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?
Madam, I heard her speak. She has a low-pitched voice.	Madam, I heard her speak. She is low-voiced.
Thats not in her favor. He cant like her very long.	Thats not so good. He cannot like her long.
No, no, Octavia, its not only that. That would be excusablethat and a thousand other offenses like it. But Caesar has gone and waged a new war against Pompey. He made his will and read it in a public assembly.Roman politicians could gain popularity among the common people by writing a will that included bequests in their favor, such as sums of money, parkland, or orchards dedicated to their use.He made his will and read it in a public assembly. He hardly refers to me at all, though official decisions are supposed to be made jointly. When he cant avoid mentioning my services to the state, he minimizes them as much as possible. When situations arise when it would be natural to emphasize my due credit, he either ignores them or only pays me lip service.	Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that That were excusable, that and thousands more Of semblable importbut he hath waged New wars gainst Pompey; made his will, and read it To public ear; Spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not But pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly He vented them, most narrow measure lent me. When the best hint was given him, he not took t, Or did it from his teeth.
Oh, dear husband, dont believe everything you hearor if you must believe it, dont let it all make you angry. No lady could be more miserable than I if you two disagree. Ill be left in the middle, praying for both sides. The good gods will laugh at me when on the one hand I pray for my husband and on the other for my brother. Let my husband win! Let my brother win! One prayer cancels out the other. Theres no middle ground between these two extremes.	O my good lord, Believe not all, or, if you must believe, Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady, If this division chance, neer stood between, Praying for both parts. The good gods will mock me presently, When I shall pray O bless my lord and husband! Undo that prayer by crying out as loud O bless my brother! Husband win, win brother Prays and destroys the prayer; no midway Twixt these extremes at all.
Gentle Octavia, support the one that supports you. If Im defeated, I lose my reputation. If I lose my reputation, I lose myself. It would be better for you to have no husband than a husband who lacks honor. However, as you requested, you may go and try to negotiate with your brother. In the meantime, Ill raise an army that will surpass his. Go as soon as possible, so your prayers may be answered the sooner.	Gentle Octavia, Let your best love draw to that point which seeks Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honor, I lose myself; better I were not yours Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested, Yourself shall go between s. The meantime, lady, Ill raise the preparation of a war Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste; So your desires are yours.
How goes it, friend Eros?	How now, friend Eros!
Some startling news has just arrived, sir.	Theres strange news come, sir.
What news, man?	What, man?
Caesar and Lepidus declared war against Pompey.	Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.
Thats old news. Whos winning?	This is old. What is the success?
Caesar used Lepidus in the war, but as soon as it was over, Lepidus was expelled from the triumvirate. He wasnt allowed any of the glory of the victory, and he was accused of treasonous correspondence with Pompey. On the basis of Caesars accusation alone, Lepidus was imprisoned. So the weak third of the triumvirate is imprisoned until death frees him.	Caesar, having made use of him in the wars gainst Pompey, presently denied him rivality, would not let him partake in the glory of the action, and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal seizes him. So the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
So now the world will only be devoured by two sets of jawsCaesars and Antonys. And even if you throw everything you possess to the two of them, theyll battle each other to the death to have it all. Wheres Antony?	Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more, And throw between them all the food thou hast, Theyll grind the one the other. Wheres Antony?
Hes walking in the garden, like this (imitating anger). And he kicks the leaves on the path, exclaiming, Lepidus, you fool! Then he threatens to kill the officer who murdered Pompey.Pompey was killed by one of Antonys officers, Titius, during his campaign for Antonys territories. Some historians believe that Titius acted on Antonys specific order.Then he threatens to kill the officer who murdered Pompey.	Hes walking in the garden(imitating anger) thus, and spurns The rush that lies before him; cries, Fool Lepidus! And threats the throat of that his officer That murdered Pompey.
Antonys grand navy is prepared.	Our great navys rigged.
To sail to Italy and Caesar. Another thing, Domitius: Antony wants to see you now. I should have waited to tell you my news.	For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius: My lord desires you presently. My news I might have told hereafter.
In Alexandria he condemned Rome, and thats not all. This is what happened: he and Cleopatra sat on chairs of gold on a silver-covered stage in the marketplace. Caesarionwhom they call my fathers sonJulius Caesar was Octavius Caesars adopted father (biologically, he was his uncle).Caesarionwhom they call my fathers sonand all their illegitimate children sat at their feet. Antony confirmed her possession of Egypt and made her absolute Queen of lower Syria, Cyprus, and Lydia.	Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more In Alexandria. Heres the manner of t: I th marketplace, on a tribunal silvered, Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold Were publicly enthroned. At the feet sat Caesarion, whom they call my fathers son, And all the unlawful issue that their lust Since then hath made between them. Unto her He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, Absolute Queen.
He did this in public?	This in the public eye?
In the public arena, where they perform sporting events. He proclaimed his sons to be kings of kings. He gave Media, Parthia, and Armenia to Alexander. He gave Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia to Ptolemy. Cleopatra was dressed like the goddess Isis. They say she often attended her public functions like that.	I th common showplace, where they exercise. His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings: Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assigned Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She In th habiliments of the goddess Isis That day appeared, and oft before gave audience, As tis reported, so.
Lets send this news to Rome.	Let Rome be thus informed.
The Roman people are fed up with his arrogance already. Theyll abandon him completely when they hear this.	Who, queasy with his insolence already, Will their good thoughts call from him.
Ill be straight with you. Do not doubt it.	I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
But why, why, why?	But why, why, why?
You opposed my taking part in the war. You said it wasnt proper.	Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars And sayst it is not fit.
Well, is it? Is it?	Well, is it, is it?
Isnt this war against me? Why shouldnt I be there in person?	Is t not denounced against us? Why should not we Be there in person?
Well, I could answer that if we went to war on male and female horses alikethe male horses would be totally distracted and useless. The mares would be ridden by their riders and the male horses.	Well, I could reply, If we should serve with horse and mares together, The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear A soldier and his horse.
What do you mean?	What is t you say?
Antony will necessarily be distracted by your presence. You will affect his heart and his head. Youll take up time he cant afford to lose. Hes already criticized for frivolous behavior. In Rome they say that your eunuch Photinus and your maids run the war.	Your presence needs must puzzle Antony, Take from his heart, take from his brain, from s time What should not then be spared. He is already Traduced for levity, and tis said in Rome That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids Manage this war.
Let Rome fall! May the tongues of our critics rot! I have responsibilities in this war, and as the absolute ruler of my kingdom I will carry out my duties as if I were a man. Dont argue against it. I wont stay behind.	Sink Rome! And their tongues rot That speak against us! A charge we bear i th war, And as the president of my kingdom will Appear there for a man. Speak not against it. I will not stay behind.
Taurus!	Taurus!
My lord?	My lord?
Dont attack by land. Keep the army together. Dont provoke them to battle until we have finished at sea. Dont exceed your orders as written here.	Strike not by land; keep whole. Provoke not battle Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed The prescript of this scroll.
	Upon this jump.
Assemble our squadrons on the other side of the hill, in sight of Caesars navy. From there well be able to see how many ships he has and plan accordingly.	Set we our squadrons on yond side o th hill, In eye of Caesars battle, from which place We may the number of the ships behold And so proceed accordingly.
Were ruined, ruined, ruined! I cant watch any more. The Egyptian flagship, the Antoniad, followed by all sixty Egyptian ships, has turned and fled. It destroyed my eyes to look upon it.	Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer. Th Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral, With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder. To see t mine eyes are blasted.
Gods and goddessesthe whole congregation of them!	Gods and goddesses, All the whole synod of them!
Whats wrong with you?	Whats thy passion?
We have lost a major portion of the world through utter foolishness. We have kissed away entire kingdoms and provinces.	The greater cantle of the world is lost With very ignorance. We have kissed away Kingdoms and provinces.
How goes the battle?	How appears the fight?
Our side shows all the signs of certain defeat, which appear like the symptomatic sores of the plague. Right in the middle of the fight, just when the battle could have gone either wayactually we had a slight advantagethat immoral Egyptian nagMay she die of leprosy!suddenly became frightened, and turned her ships around and fled.	On our side like the tokened pestilence, Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt Whom leprosy oertake!i th midst o th fight, When vantage like a pair of twins appeared Both as the same, or rather ours the elder, The breeze upon her, like a cow in June, Hoists sails and flies.
I saw that. The sight made me so sick I couldnt watch any more.	That I beheld. Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not Endure a further view.
Listen. The earth tells me to stop walking upon it, as its ashamed to carry me. Friends, come here. Im completely lost. I have a ship full of treasure. Take that. Divide it. Escape and make peace with Caesar.	Hark. The land bids me tread no more upon t. It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither. I am so lated in the world that I Have lost my way forever. I have a ship Laden with gold. Take that, divide it. Fly And make your peace with Caesar.
Flee? Not us.	Fly? Not we.
I have already fled from my true self. Ive told cowards to turn their backs on me and run. Friends, go. Ive decided on a plan that doesnt require your assistance. Leave. My treasures in the harbor; take it. Oh, I followed something Im ashamed to look at now! Even my hair revolts. The white hairs blame the brown hairs for being irresponsible, and the brown ones blame the white ones for being spineless and foolish. Friends, go. Ill give you letters of introduction to some friends of mine who will help you. Please, dont be sad, and dont tell me how reluctant you are. Take your cues from my own despair. Abandon the person that has abandoned himself. Go to the harbor immediately! Ill give you the title to that ship and its treasure. Just give me a moment, pleaseonly a moment. Ive relinquished my authority, so pleaseIll see you all before long.	I have fled myself, and have instructed cowards To run and show their shoulders. Friends, begone. I have myself resolved upon a course Which has no need of you. Begone. My treasures in the harbor. Take it. Oh, I followed that I blush to look upon! My very hairs do mutiny, for the white Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them For fear and doting. Friends, begone. You shall Have letters from me to some friends that will Sweep your way for you. Pray you, look not sad, Nor make replies of loathness. Take the hint Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left Which leaves itself. To the seaside straightway! I will possess you of that ship and treasure. Leave me, I pray, a little. Pray you now, Nay, do so, for indeed I have lost command. Therefore I pray you. Ill see you by and by.
Let the envoy from Antony come in. Do you know him?	Let him appear thats come from Antony. Know you him?
Its Antonys schoolmaster. By sending such an insignificant emissary, Antony shows us how low he has sunk. Not so long ago, he had so many royal supporters that he sent along extra kings as messengers.	Caesar, tis his schoolmaster An argument that he is plucked, when hither He sends so poor a pinion of his wing, Which had superfluous kings for messengers Not many moons gone by.
Come forward and speak.	Approach and speak.
Humble as I am, I represent Antony. Until recently, I was as unimportant to his affairs as the morning dew is to the wide ocean.	Such as I am, I come from Antony. I was of late as petty to his ends As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf To his grand sea.
So be it. Say what youre here for.	Be t so. Declare thine office.
He acknowledges that you are the master of his fate, and he requests to be allowed to live in Egypt. If that is not granted, he reduces his requests and asks only that he be allowed to live as a private man in Athens. Thats all he asks for himself. Cleopatra recognizes your greatness and accepts your authority. She only asks that the crown of Egypt pass to her heirs, who are now at your mercy.	Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and Requires to live in Egypt; which not granted, He lessens his requests, and to thee sues To let him breathe between the heavens and earth A private man in Athens. This for him. Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness, Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs, Now hazarded to thy grace.
What are we going to do, Enobarbus?	What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Think about our situation, then die.	Think and die.
Who is to blame for this: Antony or I?	Is Antony or we in fault for this?
Only Antony was at fault. He put his desire in charge of his reason. So what if you ran from the battle, terrified, as ranks of ships threatened one another? Why should he have followed you? With half the world opposing the other half, it wasnt the time for Antony, the pivotal player, to let love distract him. To race after your departing ships, leaving his navy to watch, was a shame as great as the resulting loss.	Antony only, that would make his will Lord of his reason. What though you fled From that great face of war, whose several ranges Frighted each other? Why should he follow? The itch of his affection should not then Have nicked his captainship at such a point When half to half the world opposed, he being The merd question. Twas a shame no less Than was his loss, to course your flying flags And leave his navy gazing.
Please, lets not talk about it.	Prithee, peace.
Is that his answer?	Is that his answer?
Yes, my lord.	Ay, my lord.
The Queen will be treated fairly if she gives me up?	The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she Will yield us up?
Thats what he says.	He says so.
Tell her. (to CLEOPATRA ) If you send my aged head to that boy, Caesar, hell give you all the kingdoms you want.	Let her know t. (to CLEOPATRA ) To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head, And he will fill thy wishes to the brim With principalities.
He calls me boy and scolds me as if he had the power to whip me out of Egypt. He whipped my messenger with rods. He dares me to personal combat, Caesar against Antony. Let the old ruffian discover that I have many other ways to die, and in the meantime, well laugh at his challenge.	He calls me boy and chides as he had power To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger He hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal combat, Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know I have many other ways to die, meantime Laugh at his challenge.
Caesar must realize that when a man as powerful as Antony begins to rage, he has been pursued to the point of collapse. Dont give him time to catch his breath. Take advantage of his unreasonable rage. Anger does not protect the angry well.	Caesar must think When one so great begins to rage, hes hunted Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now Make boot of his distraction. Never anger Made good guard for itself.
Tell our top commanders that I want tomorrows battle to be the last we fight. Our army has recently acquired many of Mark Antonys former soldiersenough to capture him. See that it is done, and prepare a feast for the soldiers. We have enough supplies for it, and theyve earned it. Poor Antony!	Let our best heads Know that tomorrow the last of many battles We mean to fight. Within our files there are, Of those that served Mark Antony but late, Enough to fetch him in. See it done And feast the army. We have store to do t, And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony!
He wont fight with me, Domitius?	He will not fight with me, Domitius?
No.	No.
Why wont he?	Why should he not?
He thinks that since his fortune is twenty times better than yours, it would be like pitting twenty men against one.	He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune, He is twenty men to one.
Tomorrow, soldier, Ill fight by sea and land. By the end I will either live, or else Ill restore my honor by shedding my blood. Will you fight well?	Tomorrow, soldier, By sea and land Ill fight. Or I will live Or bathe my dying honor in the blood Shall make it live again. Woot thou fight well?
When I strike, Ill cry, All or nothing!	Ill strike and cry, Take all.
Well put. Come on. Call out my household servants.	Well said. Come on! Call forth my household servants.
	Be bounteous at our meal.
You have all served me well, and kings are your peers.	Thou hast been rightly honest.So hast thou, Thou,and thou,and thou. You have served me well, And kings have been your fellows.
(aside to ENOBARBUS ) What is this?	(aside to ENOBARBUS ) What means this?
(aside to CLEOPATRA ) Its one of those nostalgic moods caused by sorrow.	(aside to CLEOPATRA ) Tis one of those odd tricks which sorrow shoots Out of the mind.
Good night, brother. Tomorrow is the day.	Brother, good night. Tomorrow is the day.
This battle will determine who wins the war. Take care of yourself. Have you heard about anything unusual happening in the city?	It will determine one way. Fare you well. Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
No. What was it?	Nothing. What news?
It was probably just a rumor. Good night.	Belike tis but a rumor. Good night to you.
Well sir, good night.	Well, sir, good night.
Soldiers, watch carefully.	Soldiers, have careful watch.
You too. Good night. Good night.	And you. Good night, good night.
This is our station. And if our navy wins tomorrow, no doubt our army will do their part.	Here we. And if tomorrow Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope Our landmen will stand up.
Its an outstanding army and highly motivated.	Tis a brave army, and full of purpose.
Quiet! Whats that sound?	Peace! What noise?
Listen! Listen!	List, list!
Listen!	Hark!
Theres music coming out of thin air.	Music i th air.
From under the earth.	Under the earth.
Its a lucky sign, isnt it?	It signs well, does it not?
No.	No.
(calling) Eros! Bring my armor, Eros.	(calling) Eros! Mine armor, Eros!
Get a little sleep.	Sleep a little.
No, my dear... Eros, come on, bring my armor, Eros.	No, my chuck.Eros, come, mine armor, Eros!
	If fortune be not ours today, it is Because we brave her. Come.
No, Ill help too. Whats this part for?	Nay, Ill help too. Whats this for?
Ah, leave it alone. Leave it alone! You armor my heart. No! No! That part goes there.	Ah, let be, let be! Thou art The armorer of my heart. False, false. This, this.
Really, Ill help. It must go like this.	Sooth, la, Ill help. Thus it must be.
Yes, well done. Weve got it now.Do you see this, my good fellow? Go and put on your own armor.	Well, well, We shall thrive now.Seest thou, my good fellow? Go put on thy defenses.
In a minute, sir.	Briefly, sir.
Didnt I buckle this well?	Is not this buckled well?
Excellently, excellently. Anyone who unbuckles this before I want to take it off to rest will be sorry.Youre fumbling, Eros. My Queens a better squire than you are. Hurry.Oh, love, if you could only watch the battle today and see how expert I am at my craft.	Rarely, rarely. He that unbuckles this, till we do please To doff t for our repose, shall hear a storm. Thou fumblest, Eros, and my Queens a squire More tight at this than thou. Dispatch.O love, That thou couldst see my wars today, and knewst The royal occupation! Thou shouldst see A workman in t.
May the gods bless Antony today!	The gods make this a happy day to Antony!
I wish you and your scarred self had convinced me to wage our last battle on land.	Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed To make me fight at land!
If you had, the kings that have revolted and the soldier that deserted this morning would still be behind you.	Hadst thou done so, The kings that have revolted, and the soldier That has this morning left thee, would have still Followed thy heels.
Who deserted this morning?	Whos gone this morning?
You dont know? Someone who was always near you. If you call for Enobarbus, he wont hear you. Or if he can hear you from Caesars camp, hell reply, Im no longer on your side.	Who? One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus He shall not hear thee, or from Caesars camp Say I am none of thine.
What are you saying?	What sayest thou?
Sir, hes with Caesar.	Sir, He is with Caesar.
Sir, he left his belongings and treasure.	Sir, his chests and treasure He has not with him.
Hes gone?	Is he gone?
Its certain.	Most certain.
Eros, send his treasure to him. Do it now. Dont keep anything back, I insist. Write to him from meIll sign itsending greetings and gentle good-byes. Say that I hope he never has cause to look for a new master. Oh, my bad luck has forced honest men to become traitors. Hurry. Enobarbus!	Go, Eros, send his treasure after. Do it. Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him I will subscribegentle adieus and greetings. Say that I wish he never find more cause To change a master. Oh, my fortunes have Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.Enobarbus!
Agrippa, go start the battle. We want Antony taken alive. Make sure everyone knows that.	Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight. Our will is Antony be took alive. Make it so known.
I will, Caesar.	Caesar, I shall.
An era of universal peace is about to start. If this battle goes well for us, there will be peace in all three corners of the worldAfrica, Asia, and Europe, which were all under Roman rulethree corners of the world.	The time of universal peace is near. Prove this a prosprous day, the three-nooked world Shall bear the olive freely.
Antony has come onto the battlefield.	Antony Is come into the field.
Go order Agrippa to put the men who deserted Antonys army at the front. That way Antony will feel like hes fighting his own men.	Go charge Agrippa Plant those that have revolted in the vant, That Antony may seem to spend his fury Upon himself.
Alexas deserted. He went to Judea as if on Antonys business, but he persuaded Herod to support Caesar instead. Caesar hanged him for this service. Canidius and the others that left Antony are given hospitality here but no positions of trust. Ive done a bad thing, for which I will blame myself so much that Ill never be happy again.	Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on Affairs of Antony, there did dissuade Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar And leave his master Antony. For this pains Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest That fell away have entertainment but No honorable trust. I have done ill, Of which I do accuse myself so sorely That I will joy no more.
Retreat! Weve advanced too far. Caesar himself is in trouble and there are more adversaries than we expected.	Retire! We have engaged ourselves too far. Caesar himself has work, and our oppression Exceeds what we expected.
Oh, my brave Emperor, this is what I call a fight! If wed fought like this before, wed have driven them home with bandaged heads.	O my brave Emperor, this is fought indeed! Had we done so at first, we had droven them home With clouts about their heads.
Youre bleeding a lot.	Thou bleedst apace.
I had a scar here that looked like a T; now its an H.	I had a wound here that was like a T, But now tis made an H.
Theyre retreating.	They do retire.
Well chase em into their latrines. I still have room for six more wounds.	Well beat em into bench-holes. I have yet Room for six scotches more.
Theyre retreating, sir, and our superiority indicates a clear victory.	They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves For a fair victory.
Lets slash their backs and grab em like we do rabbits, from behind. Its fair game to mark a coward.	Let us score their backs And snatch em up, as we take hares, behind! Tis sport to maul a runner.
Ill reward you once for your cheerfulness and ten times for your courage. Come on.	I will reward thee Once for thy sprightly comfort and tenfold For thy good valor. Come thee on.
Weve driven him all the way back to his camp. One of you run to the Queen with the news.	We have beat him to his camp. Run one before And let the Queen know of our gests.
	Before the sun shall see s, well spill the blood That has today escaped. I thank you all, For doughty-handed are you, and have fought Not as you served the cause, but as t had been Each mans like mine. You have shown all Hectors. Enter the city. Clip your wives, your friends. Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss The honored gashes whole.
	To this great fairy Ill commend thy acts, Make her thanks bless thee. O thou day o the world, (to CLEOPATRA ) Chain mine armed neck. Leap thou, attire and all, Through proof of harness to my heart, and there Ride on the pants triumphing!
Lord of lords! Your courage is infinite. Have you returned smiling from the great battle for the world?	Lord of lords! O infinite virtue, comst thou smiling from The worlds great snare uncaught?
If we arent relieved in an hour, we have to return to our barracks. The night is bright, and they say well be forming for battle by two a.m.	If we be not relieved within this hour, We must return to th court of guard. The night Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle By th second hour i th morn.
That last day was a hard one for us.	This last day was a shrewd one to s.
Oh, listen to me, night	O bear me witness, night
Who is this?	What man is this?
Stay hidden and listen.	Stand close and list him.
Be my witness, oh you blessed moon. The men who revolted against Antony will be remembered scornfully in the history books. But poor Enobarbus repented.	Be witness to me, O thou blessd moon, When men revolted shall upon record Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did Before thy face repent.
Thats Enobarbus?	Enobarbus?
Quiet! Keep listening.	Peace! Hark further.
Oh, moon, you queen of sadness, drop poisonous dew on me so that my life, which continues against my wishes, will end. Take my heart and throw it against my hard, stony sin. My heart, which dried out with grief, will surely break apart into a powder, and that will be the end of my disgusting mind. Oh, Antony! You are more noble than my revolt is dishonorable. Forgive my crimes against you, but let history record me as a fugitive traitor. Oh, Antony! Oh, Antony!	O sovereign mistress of true melancholy, The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me, That life, a very rebel to my will, May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart Against the flint and hardness of my fault, Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony, Nobler than my revolt is infamous, Forgive me in thine own particular, But let the world rank me in register A master-leaver and a fugitive. O Antony! O Antony!
Theyve switched their operation to the sea today. We didnt please them on land.	Their preparation is today by sea. We please them not by land.
Were ready for both, my lord.	For both, my lord.
I wish theyd fight in fire or in the air. Wed meet them there too. But heres the plan: our army will stay with us on the hills by the city. Orders have been given to the navy and theyve left port. Well be able to analyze and direct the battle better from the hills.	I would theyd fight i th fire or i th air, Wed fight there too. But this it is: our foot Upon the hills adjoining to the city Shall stay with us. Order for sea is given; They have put forth the haven, Where their appointment we may best discover And look on their endeavor.
We wont move our land forces unless were attacked. And I doubt that will happen, since most of Antonys men are with his navy. Lets take up the best positions we can in the valleys.	But being charged, we will be still by land Which, as I take t, we shall, for his best force Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales, And hold our best advantage.
They still havent joined the battle. Ill be able to see better from that pine tree over there. Ill let you know right away how its going.	Yet they are not joined. Where yond pine does stand I shall discover all. Ill bring thee word Straight how tis like to go.
Swallows have built nests in Cleopatras sails. The fortunetellers wont say whether thats a good sign or a bad one, but they dont look happy. Antony is valiant and dejected. His mood changes by fits and starts; his checkered luck vacillates between hope and fear, winning and losing.	Swallows have built In Cleopatras sails their nests. The auguries Say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly, And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony Is valiant and dejected, and by starts His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear Of what he has and has not.
All is lost! This treacherous Egyptian has betrayed me. My fleet has surrendered to the enemy. You can see them over there throwing their hats up in the air and drinking together like long lost friends. Three-time traitor and whore! Its you who have sold me to this youth, Caesar. Now my war is only with you. Tell the army to flee. Revenge on Cleopatra will be my last act. Order them to escape. Go!	All is lost! This foul Egyptian hath betrayd me. My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder They cast their caps up and carouse together Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore! Tis thou Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly, For when I am revenged upon my charm, I have done all. Bid them all fly. Begone!
Help me, ladies! Oh, Antony is more furious than Telamon, who killed himself in a jealous rage. The wild boar of Thessaly, which the goddess Diana sent to punish King Caledon for neglecting her sacrifices, didnt foam at the mouth as much as Antony does now.	Help me, my women! Oh, hes more mad Than Telamon for his shield. The boar of Thessaly Was never so embossed.
Go to your tomb! Lock yourself in and send him word that youre dead. When a great person departs, it causes more pain than when the soul leaves the body.	To th monument! There lock yourself and send him word you are dead. The soul and body rive not more in parting Than greatness going off.
To my tomb! Mardian, go tell him Ive killed myself. Say the last word I spoke was Antony, and please word it pathetically. Go, Mardian, and let me know how he reacts to my death. (to the others) To the tomb!	To th monument! Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself. Say that the last I spoke was Antony, And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian, And bring me how he takes my death. (to the others) To th monument!
Eros, can you still see me?	Eros, thou yet beholdst me?
Yes, noble lord.	Ay, noble lord.
Sometimes we see a cloud that looks like a dragon. Sometimes theres a cloud like a bear or a lion, a castle, a floating rock, a craggy mountain. Or it might look like a blue cliff with trees on it that bow to the ground. These things fool our eyes by seeming solid, when they are actually only air. Youve seen these illusions. Theyre spectacles that appear at sunset.	Sometimes we see a cloud thats dragonish, A vapor sometime like a bear or lion, A towered citadel, a pendant rock, A forkd mountain, or blue promontory With trees upon t that nod unto the world And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these signs. They are black vespers pageants.
Yes, my lord.	Ay, my lord.
What looks like a horse is quick as thought disfigured by the wind, made as difficult to distinguish as water poured into water.	That which is now a horse, even with a thought The rack dislimns and makes it indistinct As water is in water.
Thats true, my lord.	It does, my lord.
Eros, my young friend, your captain is now just like that cloud. Here and now I seem like Antony, but I cant keep myself in this form, my boy. I went to war to save Cleopatra, whose love I thought I had, since she had mineand mine carried with it a million others, those of my soldiers, now lost. The Queen conspired with Caesar to undermine my success and assure his victory. No, dont cry, kind Eros. We still have the option of killing ourselves.	My good knave Eros, now thy captain is Even such a body. Here I am Antony, Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave. I made these wars for Egypt, and the Queen, Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine Which whilst it was mine had annexed unto t A million more, now lostshe, Eros, has Packed cards with Caesar and false-played my glory Unto an enemys triumph. Nay, weep not, gentle Eros. There is left us Ourselves to end ourselves.
Oh, Charmian, I will never leave this tomb!	O Charmian, I will never go from hence.
Be calm, dear lady.	Be comforted, dear madam.
No, I wont. Strange and terrible events are all welcome, but I despise comforts. The size of my sorrow must be as great as its source.	No, I will not. All strange and terrible events are welcome, But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow, Proportioned to our cause, must be as great As that which makes it.
	
He is close to death, but not dead yet. Look out the other window; his guard has brought him here.	His deaths upon him, but not dead. Look out o th other side your monument. His guard have brought him thither.
Oh, sun, burn up the orbit in which you move, so that the world may be dark forever! Oh, Antony, Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help! Help, friends below; lift him up here.	O sun, Burn the great sphere thou movst in. Darkling stand The varying shore o th world! O Antony, Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help! Help, friends below! Lets draw him hither.
Be calm! It was not Caesars bravery that conquered Antony but Antonys that has triumphed over himself.	Peace! Not Caesars valor hath oerthrown Antony, But Antonys hath triumphed on itself.
Thats the way it should beonly Antony should conquer Antony. But how terrible that it has happened!	So it should be, that none but Antony Should conquer Antony, but woe tis so!
Dolabella, go see Antony. Tell him to surrender. His position is hopeless. This delay makes him look ridiculous.	Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield. Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks The pauses that he makes.
Right away, Caesar.	Caesar, I shall.
What are you doing with a sword? Who do you think you are coming in here armed?	Wherefore is that? And what art thou that darst Appear thus to us?
My name is Decretus. I served Mark Antony, who was the commander most worthy of my services. While he was alive, I lived only to serve him and oppose his enemies. If you accept my service, Ill serve you the same way. If not, you can kill me.	I am called Dercetus. Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy Best to be served. Whilst he stood up and spoke, He was my master, and I wore my life To spend upon his haters. If thou please To take me to thee, as I was to him Ill be to Caesar. If thou pleasest not, I yield thee up my life.
What are you saying?	What is t thou sayst?
Caesar, Im telling you that Antony is dead.	I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
When such a great man dies there should be a thunderclap. The fractured world, in its confusion, should send lions into the city streets and humans into the wilderness to live in lions dens. This isnt the death of one man. Its the death of half the world.	The breaking of so great a thing should make A greater crack. The round world Should have shook lions into civil streets And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony Is not a single doom. In the name lay A moiety of the world.
Being alone has helped me better understand my life. Its pathetic to be Caesar. He cant be Fortune; hes only Fortunes errand boy. It would be a great deed to commit suicidethat act which ends all other things, which makes all accidents and changes stop. Which causes you to sleep, and takes you away from earthly concerns.	My desolation does begin to make A better life. Tis paltry to be Caesar. Not being Fortune, hes but Fortunes knave, A minister of her will. And it is great To do that thing that ends all other deeds, Which shackles accidents and bolts up change, Which sleeps and never palates more the dung, The beggars nurse, and Caesars.
Caesar greets the Queen of Egypt and asks that you consider what you will ask from him.	Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt, And bids thee study on what fair demands Thou meanst to have him grant thee.
Whats your name?	Whats thy name?
My name is Proculeius.	My name is Proculeius.
Antony told me about you. He said you were a man I could trust. But I dont worry about being deceived because I dont need to trust. If your master wants a queen to beg from him, you should tell him that a queen will beg for no less than a kingdom. If he will grant me conquered Egypt, so that I may give it to my son, I will kneel to him with thanks. 	Antony Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but I do not greatly care to be deceived, That have no use for trusting. If your master Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him, That majesty, to keep decorum, must No less beg than a kingdom. If he please To give me conquered Egypt for my son, He gives me so much of mine own as I Will kneel to him with thanks. 
I remember, Adam, thats exactlyThe actual reason is never made clear; the audience has happened upon a conversation already in progress.exactly why my father only left me a thousand crowns in his will. And as you know, my father commanded my brother, Oliver, to make sure that I was brought up welland thats where my sadness begins. Oliver keeps my brother Jaques away at school, and everyone says hes doing extremely well there. But he keeps me at home in the countryto be precise, he keeps me stuck at home but doesnt support me. I ask you, is this any way to treat a gentleman as nobly born as I am, to pen me in like an ox? His horses get treated better than I doat least he feeds them and trains them properly, and spends a lot of money on trainers for them. All Ive gained from his care is weight, which makes me as indebted to him as his animals on the manure pile are. He gives me plenty of nothing, and takes away everything else, letting me eat with his servants, refusing me whats owed me as his brother, and ruining my good birth with a poor education. This is what angers me, Adam. My fathers temper and spirit, which I think I share, makes me want to mutiny against my brothers tyranny. I wont stand for it any longer, though I havent yet figured out how to revolt.	As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashionbequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, asthou sayest, charged my brother on his blessing to breed mewell. And there begins my sadness. My brother Jaques hekeeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit. Formy part, he keeps me rustically at home or, to speak moreproperly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you thatkeeping for a gentleman of my birth that differs not fromthe stalling of an ox? His horses are bred better, for, besidesthat they are fair with their feeding, they are taught theirmanage and, to that end, riders dearly hired. But I, hisbrother, gain nothing under him but growth, for the whichhis animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as I.Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, thesomething that nature gave me his countenance seems totake from me. He lets me feed with his hinds, bars me theplace of a brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines mygentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that grievesme, and the spirit of my father, which I think is within me,begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no longerendure it, though yet I know no wise remedy how to avoidit.
Here comes my master, your brother.	Yonder comes my master, your brother.
Go hide, Adam, and youll hear how he abuses me.	Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.
Hey, you! What are you makingOliver means what are you doing here, but Orlando interprets making in its usual sense.making here?	Now, sir, what make you here?
Nothing. Ive never been taught how to make anything.	Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.
Well, then, what are you messing up?	What mar you then, sir?
Im helping you mess up one of Gods creationsyour poor, unworthy brotherby having him do nothing.	Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made,a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
Indeed, sir, find something better to do and get lost for a while.	Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.
Should I tend your pigs and eat husks with them? When did I wasteOrlando alludes to the prodigal son, a figure from the Bible who leaves home, spends all his money, and returns to his fathers house in poverty (Luke 15).waste so much money that I ended up this poor?	Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them? Whatprodigal portion have I spent that I should come to suchpenury?
Do you know where you are, sir?	Know you where you are, sir?
Yes, sir, very wellIm here in your orchard.	O sir, very well: here in your orchard.
Do you know whom youre talking to?	Know you before whom, sir?
Yes, better than you know me. I know youre my oldest brother, and deserve more respect. But were in the same family, so you should acknowledge that I am a gentleman too. According to custom, as the first-born you are my superior. But its not customary to treat me like Im not even a gentleman, even if there were twenty brothers between you and me. I have as much of our father in me as you do, though I admit youre closer to him and matter more because youre older.	Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know you aremy eldest brother, and in the gentle condition of blood youshould so know me. The courtesy of nations allows you mybetter, in that you are the first-born, but the same traditiontakes not away my blood, were there twenty brothersbetwixt us. I have as much of my father in me as you, albeit,I confess, your coming before me is nearer to his reverence.
(hitting ORLANDO) What nerve!	What, boy! (strikes him)
(grabbing hold of OLIVER) Come on, big brother; you dont know anything about fighting.	Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this. (seizes him)
What, you dare put your hands on me, villain?	Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
Im no villain. Im the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys, and anyone who claims my fathers sons are villains is a villain himself. If you werent my brother, Id leave this hand of mine on your neck until Id pulled out your tongue for talking like this. Youve only insulted yourself.	I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland deBoys. He was my father, and he is thrice a villain that sayssuch a father begot villains. Wert thou not my brother, Iwould not take this hand from thy throat till this other hadpulled out thy tongue for saying so. Thou hast railed onthyself.
Gentlemen, calm down. For the sake of your fathers memory, make peace.	Sweet masters, be patient. For your fathers remembrance,be at accord.
Let me go, I say.	Let me go, I say.
I wont until Im ready. You will listen to me. My father instructed you in his will to give me a good education. But youve raised me as a peasant, hiding from me what I needed to become a gentleman. My fathers spirit is growing in me, and I wont take this any longer. Either give me the freedom to act like someone of my own rank or give me my share of the inheritance, so that I can seek my fortune elsewhere.	I will not till I please. You shall hear me. My father chargedyou in his will to give me good education. You have trainedme like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me allgentlemanlike qualities. The spirit of my father growsstrong in me, and I will no longer endure it. Therefore allowme such exercises as may become a gentleman, or give methe poor allottery my father left me by testament. With thatI will go buy my fortunes.
And what are you going to do after youve spent your money? Beg? Well, sir, go inside. Im not going to be bothered by you for long. Youll get some of what you want. Now please leave me alone.	And what wilt thou dobeg when that is spent? Well, sir,get you in. I will not long be troubled with you. You shallhave some part of your will. I pray you leave me.
I wont bother you any more than necessary.	I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
(to ADAM) And you get lost too, you old dog.	Get you with him, you old dog.
Is that my rewardto be called old dog? Well, its true, Ive served this family so long Ive gotten old and toothless, like a dog. God bless my old master. He would never have spoken to me like this.	Is old dog my reward? Most true, I have lost my teeth inyour service. God be with my old master. He would nothave spoke such a word.
Is that how its going to be? Are you starting to challenge me? Ill cure you of your insolence, and Im not going to give you a thousand crowns, either!Hey, Dennis!	Is it even so? Begin you to grow upon me? I will physic yourrankness and yet give no thousand crowns neither.Holla,Dennis!
Did you call for me, your Worship?	Calls your Worship?
Wasnt Charles, the dukes wrestler, here to speak with me?	Was not Charles, the dukes wrestler, here to speak withme?
Yes, sir, hes here at the door right now and asks to see you.	So please you, he is here at the door and importunes accessto you.
Call him in.	Call him in.
	
Good morning, sir.	Good morrow to your Worship.
Good Mr. Charles! Tell me, whats the latest news at the new court?	Good Monsieur Charles, whats the new news at the newcourt?
No news but the old news: the old Duke Senior has been banished by his younger brother, the new Duke Frederick. A few loyal lords have gone into exile with Duke Senior, and given up their lands and money to Frederickso hes happy enough to have them leave.	Theres no news at the court, sir, but the old news. That is,the old duke is banished by his younger brother the newduke, and three or four loving lords have put themselvesinto voluntary exile with him, whose lands and revenuesenrich the new duke. Therefore he gives them good leave towander.
Can you tell me whether Rosalind, Duke Seniors daughter, has also been banished?	Can you tell if Rosalind, the dukes daughter, be banishedwith her father?
Oh, no. Duke Fredericks daughter, Celia, grew up with Rosalind, and Celia loves her cousin so much that she would have either followed her into exile or died of grief. Rosalind has stayed at court, where Duke Frederick loves her like his own daughter. No two women ever loved each other like they do.	Oh, no, for the dukes daughter her cousin so loves her,being ever from their cradles bred together, that she wouldhave followed her exile or have died to stay behind her. Sheis at the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his owndaughter, and never two ladies loved as they do.
Where will the old duke live?	Where will the old duke live?
They say hes already in the Forest of Arden. He has many cheerful men with him, and they live like Robin Hood and his outlaws. People say that new batches of young men flock there every day, and that they all pass the time without a care, like people did in the Golden AgeIn Greek mythology, the first humans lived in a Golden Age, free from work, conflict, or violence, and without the need of laws.Golden Age.	They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a manymerry men with him; and there they live like the old RobinHood of England. They say many young gentlemen flock tohim every day and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in thegolden world.
So, are you going to wrestle before the new duke tomorrow?	What, you wrestle tomorrow before the new duke?
Indeed I do, sir, and Ive come to let you in on a certain problem. Ive been informed by certain sources I cant disclose that your younger brother Orlando plans to fight me in disguise. Tomorrow, sir, Im fighting for my reputation, and any man who gets away without a broken bone or two is an exceptional wrestler indeed. Your brother is young and inexperienced, and because of my affection for you, Id hate to crush himthough Id have to, if he challenged me. Im telling you all this out of affection for you, so you can either keep him from carrying out his plans or prepare to accept his disgrace, which will be his own fault, not mine.	Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you with a matter.I am given, sir, secretly to understand that your youngerbrother Orlando hath a disposition to come in disguisedagainst me to try a fall. Tomorrow, sir, I wrestle for mycredit, and he that escapes me without some broken limbshall acquit him well. Your brother is but young and tender,and, for your love I would be loath to foil him, as I must formy own honor if he come in. Therefore, out of my love toyou, I came hither to acquaint you withal, that either youmight stay him from his intendment or brook such disgracewell as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own searchand altogether against my will.
Charles, I thank you for your loyalty to me, and youll see that Ill reward you. Id heard about my brothers plan and have been subtly trying to change his mind, but hes determined. I tell you, Charles, hes the stubbornest young fellow in France: overly ambitious, jealous of other peoples good qualities, and a traitor against me, his own blood brother. So use your discretion. Id be just as happy if you broke his neck as his finger. And youd better be careful, because if you embarrass him at allin fact, if he doesnt beat you thoroughlyhell come after you and wont leave you alone till hes poisoned you or trapped youkilled you, in other words, one way or another. It brings me to tears to say this, but there isnt another person alive who is so young and at the same time so wicked. Because hes my brother, I have to take his side. But if I really laid him bare, Id have to weep and hang my head, and you would not believe me, his behavior is so shocking.	Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shaltfind I will most kindly requite. I had myself notice of mybrothers purpose herein and have by underhand meanslabored to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. Ill tellthee, Charles: it is the stubbornest young fellow of France,full of ambition, an envious emulator of every mans goodparts, a secret and villainous contriver against me hisnatural brother. Therefore use thy discretion. I had as liefthou didst break his neck as his finger. And thou wert bestlook to t, for if thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he donot mightily grace himself on thee, he will practice againstthee by poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device andnever leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by some indirectmeans or other. For I assure theeand almost with tears Ispeak itthere is not one so young and so villainous thisday living. I speak but brotherly of him, but should Ianatomize him to thee as he is, I must blush and weep, andthou must look pale and wonder.
Im very glad I came to see you. If he shows up tomorrow, Ill give him whats coming to him. If he can manage to walk after our fight, Ill never wrestle for money again. Farewell, my lord.	I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he cometomorrow, Ill give him his payment. If ever he go aloneagain, Ill never wrestle for prize more. And so God keepyour Worship.
Take care, Charles.	Farewell, good Charles.
	
Please, Rosalind, my sweet cousinbe happy.	I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
Dear CeliaI already look much happier than I feel, but you want me to look even happier? Unless you can also teach me how to forget my banished father, you shouldnt try to teach me how to be happy.	Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of, andwould you yet I were merrier? Unless you could teach me toforget a banished father, you must not learn me how toremember any extraordinary pleasure.
Well, by this I can see that you dont love me as much as I love you. If your father had banished my father, I could have learned to love your father as my own, as long as I still had you. Youd do the same, if your love for me were as true as mine for you.	Herein I see thou lovst me not with the full weight that Ilove thee. If my uncle, thy banished father, had banishedthy uncle, the duke my father, so thou hadst been still withme, I could have taught my love to take thy father for mine.So wouldst thou, if the truth of thy love to me were sorighteously tempered as mine is to thee.
Well, Ill just forget the difficulties of my situation, in order to focus on the happiness of yours.	Well, I will forget the condition of my estate to rejoice inyours.
You know Im my fathers only child, and he isnt likely to have another. And when he dies, you will inherit his fortunebecause whatever he took from your father by force, I will return to you as affection. I swear I will, and if I ever break my promise let me turn into a monster. So please, my sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be happy.	You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like tohave, and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt be his heir, forwhat he hath taken away from thy father perforce, I willrender thee again in affection. By mine honor I will, andwhen I break that oath, let me turn monster. Therefore, mysweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.
From now on I will, cousin, and Ill think of all kinds of games for us. Let me seewhat do you think about falling in love?	From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let meseewhat think you of falling in love?
Yes, please do, so we can have a good laugh about it. But dont fall in love for real, and dont take the game too far. You want to get out of it easily, and with your honor intact.	Marry, I prithee do, to make sport withal, but love no manin good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than withsafety of a pure blush thou mayst in honor come off again.
Whats going on, Rosalind? Cupid have mercy! You wont utter a single word?	Why, cousin! Why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy, not aword?
I dont even have one to throw at a dog.	Not one to throw at a dog.
No, your words are too precious to be wasted on dogs. Throw some of your words at me. Come on, throw your words at me like you would throw stones at a dog.	No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs. Throw some of them at me. Come, lame me with reasons.
Then there would be two cousins lying sick in bed: one hurt by reasons and the other gone crazy without any.	Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one shouldbe lamed with reasons and the other mad without any.
Is all of this about your father?	But is all this for your father?
No, some of it is about my childs father. Oh, this working-dayWorking-day=wearisome.working-day world is full of thorns!	No, some of it is for my childs father. Oh, how full of briersis this working-day world!
Theyre only burrs, cousin, thrown at you because you took a holiday from conventional behavior. If we walk on the well-worn paths, they wont get caught in our petticoats.	They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holidayfoolery. If we walk not in the trodden paths our verypetticoats will catch them.
Those burrs I could shake off my clothing, but these are in my heart.	I could shake them off my coat. These burs are in my heart.
Cough them up.	Hem them away.
Id try it, if I could cry hem and have him.	I would try, if I could cry hem and have him.
Come on, take control of your feelings.	Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
Now, my companions and brothers in exile, hasnt experience made this simple life sweeter than a life of glittery pomp and circumstance? Arent these woods less perilous than the court, with all its jealousies and intrigues? Out here we feel the changing of the seasons, but were not bothered by it. When the icy fangs of the brutal, scolding wind bite and blow on my body, even though Im shivering with cold, I can appreciate the weathers honesty. I smile and think, Thank goodness the wind doesnt flatter me: its like a councilor who makes me feel what Im really made of. Adversity can have its benefitslike the ugly, poisonous toadToads were thought to be poisonous, and to each have a jewel embedded in its forehead.toad that wears a precious jewel in its forehead. In this life, far away from the civilized world, we can hear the language of the trees, read the books of the running streams, hear sermons in the stones, and discover the good in every single thing.	Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile, Hath not old custom made this life more sweet Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods More free from peril than the envious court? Here feel we not the penalty of Adam, The seasons' difference, as the icy fang And churlish chiding of the winters wind, Which, when it bites and blows upon my body, Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say, This is no flattery. These are counselors That feelingly persuade me what I am. Sweet are the uses of adversity, Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, Wears yet a precious jewel in his head. And this our life, exempt from public haunt, Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones, and good in everything.
I wouldnt change my situation for anything. Youre lucky, my lord, to be able to see the peace and sweetness even in what bad luck has brought you.	I would not change it. Happy is your Grace, That can translate the stubbornness of fortune Into so quiet and so sweet a style.
Come, shall we hunt some deer for dinner? It bothers me, though, that these poor spotted innocents, who, after all, are this deserted citys native citizens, should be gouged with arrows.	Come, shall we go and kill us venison? And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools, Being native burghers of this desert city, Should in their own confines with forkd heads Have their round haunches gored.
Can it be possible that no one saw them leave? It cannot be. Some villains in my court must have known about this and let it happen.	Can it be possible that no man saw them? It cannot be. Some villains of my court Are of consent and sufferance in this.
I cant find anyone who saw her leave. Her ladies-in-waiting saw her go to bed, and early this morning the bed was empty.	I cannot hear of any that did see her. The ladies, her attendants of her chamber Saw her abed, and in the morning early They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
My lord, that dirty clown whom you laughed at so often is also missing. Hisperia, the princesss gentlewoman, confesses that she overheard your daughter and her cousin praising the good looks and skills of the wrestler who recently beat the muscular Charles. Hisperia believes that, wherever they have gone, that young man is likely with them.	My lord, the roinish clown, at whom so oft Your Grace was wont to laugh, is also missing. Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman, Confesses that she secretly o'erheard Your daughter and her cousin much commend The parts and graces of the wrestler That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles, And she believes wherever they are gone That youth is surely in their company.
Send a message to his brother. Bring that swinger Orlando here. If hes not around, bring his brother Oliver to me. Ill make Oliver find him. Do this immediately, and dont stop searching and interrogating until youve brought home these foolish runaways.	Send to his brother. Fetch that gallant hither. If he be absent, bring his brother to me. Ill make him find him. Do this suddenly, And let not search and inquisition quail To bring again these foolish runaways.
Whos there?	Whos there?
My young master! Oh, my gentle master! My sweet master! Oh, you living memory of old Sir Rowland! What are you doing here? Why are you so strong and good? Why do people love you? And why are you noble, strong, and brave? Why would you be so foolish as to beat the moody dukes favorite champion? Your praise has beaten you home. Dont you know, master, that some mens best qualities do them in? Yours are like thatcomplete and utter traitors to you. Oh, what a world this is, when even what is beautiful in a man poisons him!	What, my young master, O my gentle master, O my sweet master, O you memory Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here? Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you? And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant? Why would you be so fond to overcome The bonny prizer of the humorous duke? Your praise is come too swiftly home before you. Know you not, master, to some kind of men Their graces serve them but as enemies? No more do yours. Your virtues, gentle master, Are sanctified and holy traitors to you. Oh, what a world is this when what is comely Envenoms him that bears it!
Why, whats the matter?	Why, whats the matter?
Oh, unlucky boy! Dont walk through these doors. In this house lives a man who despises all that is good in you. Oliver, your brotherno, not your brother; and yet hes the sonbut no, I wont call him the sonof that great man I was about to call his father, has heard about how well you did in the wrestling match, and tonight hes planning on burning your house down, with you in it. And if he fails at that, he will find other ways to kill you. I overheard him and his plans. This is no place for you; this home is now a slaughterhouse. Hate it, fear it, do not come inside.	O unhappy youth, Come not within these doors. Within this roof The enemy of all your graces lives. Your brotherno, no brotheryet the son Yet not the son, I will not call him son Of him I was about to call his father Hath heard your praises, and this night he means To burn the lodging where you use to lie, And you within it. If he fail of that, He will have other means to cut you off. I overheard him and his practices. This is no place, this house is but a butchery. Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
Oh Lord, my spirits are tired!	O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
I wouldnt care about my spirits, if my legs werent tired.	I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
Id insult my manly wardrobe by weeping like a woman if I didnt have to comfort the weaker vessel here, as the jacket and hoseDoublet (jacket) and hose (heavy, pants-length stockings) were traditional mens clothing.jacket and hose ought to be brave for the sake of the petticoat. So, have courage, good Aliena.	I could find in my heart to disgrace my mans apparel andto cry like a woman, but I must comfort the weaker vessel,as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous topetticoat. Therefore courage, good Aliena.
Please bear with me. I cant go any further.	I pray you bear with me. I cannot go no further.
Id rather bear with you than bearBy bear you, Touchstone means carry you.bear you. But if I did carry you, it would be no crossElizabethan coins had crosses stamped on them.cross to bear, because Im pretty sure you dont have any money.	For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you. YetI should bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you haveno money in your purse.
Well, this is the Forest of Arden.	Well, this is the Forest of Arden.
Yes, now Im in Arden, and that makes me the bigger fool. When I was at home, I was in a better place. But travelers have to be content.	Ay, now am I in Arden, the more fool I. When I was at home I was in a better place, but travelers must be content.
Yes, be content, good Touchstone.	Ay, be so, good Touchstone.
	
(singing) Whoever wants to lie with me, Under the greenwood tree, And turn his merry song To follow the sweet birds singing, Come here, come here, come here. Here you will find No enemy Besides winter and rough weather.	(sings) Under the greenwood tree Who loves to lie with me And turn his merry note Unto the sweet birds throat, Come hither, come hither, come hither. Here shall he see No enemy But winter and rough weather.
More, more, please, more.	More, more, I prithee, more.
Its only going to make you sad, Monsieur Jaques.	It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.
Im glad about that. More, please, more. I can suck sadness out of a song the way a weasel sucks eggs. More, please, more.	I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy outof a song as a weasel sucks eggs. More, I prithee, more.
My voice is ragged. I know I wont please you.	My voice is ragged. I know I cannot please you.
I dont want you to please me, I want you to sing. Come on, another stanzais that what you call 'em, stanzas?	I do not desire you to please me. I do desire you to sing. Come, more, another stanzo. Call you 'em stanzos?
Call them whatever you want, Monsieur Jaques.	What you will, Monsieur Jaques.
Nah, I dont care what their namesBy names, Jaques is thinking of the signatures on I.O.U notes, in which the name legally requires that the debt be honored.names are; they owe me nothing. Will you sing?	Nay, I care not for their names. They owe me nothing. Willyou sing?
Dear master, I cant go any farther. Oh, Im dying of hunger. Ill lie down here and measure out my grave. Farewell, kind master.	Dear master, I can go no further. Oh, I die for food. Here lie I down and measure out my grave. Farewell, kind master.
Hey, whats this, Adam? No braver than this? Live a little, be comforted a little, cheer up a little. If I can find any animal in this wild forest, Ill either be food for it or bring it as food for you. Youre not as close to death as you think you are. For my sake, make yourself comfortable; keep death at arms length for a while. Ill be back soon, and if I havent brought you anything to eat, I will give you permission to die. But if you die before I return, youll have made a mockery of my efforts. There we go! You look happier already, and Ill be back quickly. But youre lying out in the cold. Come, Ill carry you to shelter. And you wont die for lack of dinner, if theres anything at all to eat in this desert-like forest. Cheer up, good Adam.	Why, how now, Adam? No greater heart in thee? Live alittle, comfort a little, cheer thyself a little. If this uncouthforest yield anything savage, I will either be food for it orbring it for food to thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thypowers. For my sake, be comfortable. Hold death awhile atthe arms end. I will here be with thee presently, and if Ibring thee not something to eat, I will give thee leave to die.But if thou diest before I come, thou art a mocker of mylabor. Well said. Thou lookst cheerly, and Ill be with theequickly. Yet thou liest in the bleak air. Come, I will bear theeto some shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinnerif there live anything in this desert. Cheerly, good Adam.
I think he must have turned into an animal, because I cant find him anywhere looking like a man.	I think he be transformed into a beast, For I can nowhere find him like a man.
My lord, he just left here. He was happy here, listening to a song.	My lord, he is but even now gone hence. Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
If that man, whos made up of conflicts, becomes musical, then there must be something wrong with the universe. Go find him. Tell him I want to speak with him.	If he, compact of jars, grow musical, We shall have shortly discord in the spheres. Go seek him. Tell him I would speak with him.
He saved me the trouble: here he comes.	He saves my labor by his own approach.
Well, whats going on, mister? What kind of life do you lead that your poor friends must beg for your company? What, you look amused.	Why, how now, monsieur? What a life is this That your poor friends must woo your company? What, you look merrily.
A fool, a fool! I met a foolFools were conventionally distin guished by their motley (multi-colored) costumefool in the forest, wearing motley. What a miserable world! As sure as I eat to stay alive, I met a fool who was lying in the sun and complaining about his fortune. He spoke smartly, though he was a fool. Good morning, fool, I said. No, sir, he said, dont call me a fool until heaven has sent me my fortuneFortune is supposed to favor fools.fortune.	A fool, a fool, I met a fool i' th' forest, A motley fool. A miserable world! As I do live by food, I met a fool, Who laid him down and basked him in the sun And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms, In good set terms, and yet a motley fool. Good morrow, fool, quoth I. No, sir, quoth he, Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune.
You havent seen him since? Sir, sir, that cant be true. If I werent a merciful man, Id forget about your missing brother and punish you in his place. But do this: find your brother, wherever he is. Bring him here dead or alive within the next year, or get out off my land. Im seizing your lands and all that you possess until your brother gives testimony that absolves you of any guilt.	Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be. But were I not the better part made mercy, I should not seek an absent argument Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it: Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is. Seek him with candle. Bring him, dead or living, Within this twelvemonth or turn thou no more To seek a living in our territory. Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth Of what we think against thee.
I wish your Highness knew my true feelings in this matter: I have never in my life loved my brother.	Oh, that your Highness knew my heart in this: I never loved my brother in my life.
That makes you an even bigger villain.Well, throw him out, and have my officers seize his house and lands. Do this immediately, and send him packing.	More villain thou.Well, push him out of doors And let my officers of such a nature Make an extent upon his house and lands. Do this expediently, and turn him going.
Hang there on this tree, you lines of poetry, and bear witness to my love. And you, goddess of the moonDianain Greek and Roman mythology, goddess of the moon and the huntwas the patron of virgin maidens like Rosalind.goddess of the moon, queen of the nightwith your chaste eye, from your pale home up abovewatch your huntress, who has the power to control my life. Oh, Rosalind, these trees will be my booksIll write my thoughts down on their bark. That way, everyone who passes through this forest will find your virtues everywhere. Run, run, Orlando, on every tree carve praises of her beauty, her virtue, and her inexpressibility.	Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love. And thou, thrice-crownd queen of night, survey With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above, Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway. O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books, And in their barks my thoughts Ill character, That every eye which in this forest looks Shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere. Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.
And how are you liking the shepherds life, Master Touchstone?	And how like you this shepherds life, Master Touchstone?
Well, in and of itself, it is a good life, but given that its a shepherds life, its worthless. In the fact that its solitary, I enjoy it very much; but in the sense that its private, its terrible. Now, Im very pleased with it being outdoors, but in its not being at the court, it is boring. Being a simple life, it suits me very well, but being a life without plenty, it doesnt suit me at all. Are you any kind of philosopher yourself, shepherd?	Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life; but inrespect that it is a shepherds life, it is naught. In respectthat it is solitary, I like it very well; but in respect that it isprivate, it is a very vile life. Now in respect it is in the fields,it pleaseth me well; but in respect it is not in the court, it istedious. As it is a spare life, look you, it fits my humor well;but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against mystomach. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?
Come on, sweet Audrey. Ill get your goats, Audrey. Well now, what do you think, Audrey? Am I the man for you, Audrey? Do my simple features please you?	Come apace, good Audrey. I will fetch up your goats,Audrey. And how, Audrey? Am I the man yet? Doth mysimple feature content you?
Your features, God help us! What features?	Your features, Lord warrant us! What features?
Well, Im out here with you and your goatsGoths sounds like goats. Touchstone makes a series of puns, none of which Audrey catches.goats, in the same way that the witty poet Ovid was abandoned to the barbaric Goths.	I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capriciouspoet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.
(to himself) Oh, knowledge put to such bad use is worse than a god cooped up in a hut.	(aside) O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove in athatched house.
When a mans jokes fall that flat, its as depressing as getting a large bill for a short stay in a little room. Really, Audrey, I wish you were more poetical.	When a mans verses cannot be understood nor a mansgood wit seconded with the forward child, understanding,it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a littleroom. Truly, I would the gods had made thee poetical.
I dont know what poetical means. Is it chaste in word and action? Does it mean being truthful?	I do not know what poetical is. Is it honest in deed andword? Is it a true thing?
Not really, for the truest poetry is often the most artificial. Lovers are fond of poetry and often concoct great lies in their poems.	No, truly, for the truest poetry is the most feigning, andlovers are given to poetry, and what they swear in poetrymay be said as lovers they do feign.
But you still wish the gods had made me poetical?	Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?
I do, in fact. Right now you swear to me that you are a virgin; if you were a poet, I might have some hope you were lying.	I do, truly, for thou swearst to me thou art honest. Now, ifthou wert a poet, I might have some hope thou didst feign.
Dont talk to me. Im going to cry.	Never talk to me. I will weep.
Go ahead if you want, but remember that crying doesnt suit a man.	Do, I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider that tearsdo not become a man.
But dont I have good reason to cry?	But have I not cause to weep?
As good a reason as any. So go ahead and cry.	As good cause as one would desire. Therefore weep.
I mean, his hairJudas, the disciple who betrayed Jesus, was commonly depicted with red hair.hair is even redthe same color as that lying Judas.	His very hair is of the dissembling color.
No, its a shade browner than JudassJudas betrayed Jesus to the Romans with a kiss.Judassbut his kisses are just like Judass.	Something browner than Judass. Marry, his kisses are Judass own children.
No, really, his hair is a nice color.	I' faith, his hair is of a good color.
A very good color, this chestnut.	An excellent color. Your chestnut was ever the only color.
His kiss is as holy as bread blessed by a priest.	And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holybread.
He must have bought a cast-iron pair of DianasDiana was the patron goddess of virgins.Dianas lips: an elderly nun isnt anymore devoted in her kissing than he is. His kiss is cold and chaste.	He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A nun ofwinters sisterhood kisses not more religiously. The very iceof chastity is in them.
But why would he promise to come visit me this morning and then not come?	But why did he swear he would come this morning, andcomes not?
Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me. Do not, Phoebe. Go ahead and say you dont love me, but not so bitterly. The executioner, whos seen death so much his heart has grown hard, still says, forgive me before he drops the axe on the criminals neck. Are you going to be crueler than the man who makes his living by killing?	Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me. Do not, Phoebe. Say that you love me not, but say not so In bitterness. The common executioner, Whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes hard, Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
I dont want to be your executioner: Im trying to avoid you so that I wont hurt you. You tell me my eyes are murderousthats a very pretty sentiment, and oh-so-probable, that my frail, soft eyes (which are so cowardly that they close their gates against dust) are tyrants, butchers, and murderers. Im frowning at you with all my might right now. If my eyes can injure, let them kill you now. Go ahead. Faint, fall downif you dont, then youre lying about my eyes being murderers. Come on, show me the wound that my eyes have caused. If you get scratched with a pin, it leaves a scar; even if you lean on a rush, it leaves an impression on your palm. But my eyes, which Ive darted at you, havent even left a mark. Now I am sure that eyes cant hurt a person.	I would not be thy executioner. I fly thee, for I would not injure thee. Thou tellst me there is murder in mine eye. 'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable That eyes, that are the frailst and softest things, Who shut their coward gates on atomies, Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers. Now I do frown on thee with all my heart, And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee. Now counterfeit to swoon, why, now fall down; Or if thou canst not, Oh, for shame, for shame, Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers. Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee. Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains Some scar of it. Lean upon a rush, The cicatrice and capable impressure Thy palm some moment keeps. But now mine eyes, Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not. Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes That can do hurt.
Please, pretty young man, Id like to get to know you better.	I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted withthee.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.	They say you are a melancholy fellow.
I am. I like it better than laughing.	I am so. I do love it better than laughing.
People who are either too serious or too silly are awful. They make themselves targets for ridicule even faster than drunks do.	Those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellowsand betray themselves to every modern censure worse thandrunkards.
Well, I think its good to be serious and keep quiet.	Why, tis good to be sad and say nothing.
In that case its good to be a post.	Why then, tis good to be a post.
Im not a scholars kind of melancholy, which is all about impressing ones peers, or a musicians, which comes from his passion for his art. I dont have the proud melancholy of a courtier or the ambitious melancholy of a soldier or the calculated melancholy of a lawyer. My melancholy is not like a ladyswhich is nothing more than an affectationnor like a lovers, which combines all of these qualities. My melancholy is purely my owna compound made from many ingredients. Im serious because Ive traveled so much. When I think about all the things Ive seen, I sink into deep thoughts.	I have neither the scholars melancholy, which is emulation;nor the musicians, which is fantastical; nor the courtiers,which is proud; nor the soldiers, which is ambitious; northe lawyers, which is politic; nor the ladys, which is nice;nor the lovers, which is all these, but it is a melancholy ofmine own, compounded of many simples, extracted frommany objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of mytravels, in which my often rumination wraps me in a mosthumorous sadness.
Which one of you killed the deer?	Which is he that killed the deer?
It was me, sir.	Sir, it was I.
Lets bring this man to the duke, like a triumphant Roman conqueror. Put the deers horns on his head, like a victory branch. Do you have a song, forester, for this occasion?	Lets present him to the duke like a Roman conqueror. Andit would do well to set the deers horns upon his head for abranch of victory.Have you no song, forester, for thispurpose?
Yes, sir.	Yes, sir.
Then sing it. It doesnt matter if its in tune so long as its loud enough.	Sing it. 'Tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noiseenough.
(sings) What should we give to the man who killed this deer? Give him the hide and the horns to wear. Then sing this song to send him home (The other LORDS pick up the deer) Dont be ashamed to wear the horns. Theyve been worn since before you were born. Your fathers father wore it, And your father endured it. The horn, the horn, the lustful horn Is not to be laughed at or scorned.	(sings) What shall he have that killed the deer? His leather skin and horns to wear. Then sing him home. (The rest shall bear this burden.) Take thou no scorn to wear the horn. It was a crest ere thou wast born. Thy fathers father wore it, And thy father bore it. The horn, the horn, the lusty horn Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
Well get married at some point, Audrey. Be patient.	We shall find a time, Audrey. Patience, gentle Audrey.
Really, the priest was good enough, no matter what that old guy said.	Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the oldgentlemans saying.
No, he was wicked and vile. But Audrey, theres a boy in the forest who claims youre his girl.	A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile Martext.But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim toyou.
Yes, I know who youre talking about, but he has no claim on me.	Ay, I know who tis. He hath no interest in me in the world.
	
It warms my heart to encounter such a country bumpkin. Truly, we witty men cant hold our tongues. We have to mess with the likes of him, we just cant help it.	It is meat and drink to me to see a clown. By my troth, wethat have good wits have much to answer for. We shall beflouting. We cannot hold.
Good evening, Audrey.	Good ev'n, Audrey.
Good evening, William.	God gi' good ev'n, William.
And good evening to you, sir.	And good ev'n to you, sir.
Good evening to you, good friend. No, no, put your hat back on, put it back on. No, please, keep your head covered. How old are you, friend?	Good ev'n, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head. Nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?
Is it really possible that you could like her right after meeting her? And fall in love with her after merely seeing her? And as soon as you fall in love, with her, woo her? And as soon as you woo her, have her accept? And do you really mean to marry her?	Is t possible that on so little acquaintance you should likeher? That, but seeing, you should love her? And loving,woo? And wooing, she should grant? And will you perseverto enjoy her?
Dont question the foolish haste of it allor her poverty or our short time together or the abruptness of my courtship or the abruptness of her consentbut say with me, I love Aliena. And say with me that she loves me. Agree to this match, so we can enjoy each other. It will be to your advantage, because Ill leave our fathers house and all his property to you, while I live and die a shepherd here in the forest.	Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty ofher, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor hersudden consenting, but say with me I love Aliena; saywith her that she loves me; consent with both that we mayenjoy each other. It shall be to your good, for my fathershouse and all the revenue that was old Sir Rowlands will Iestate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.
You have my consent. You can be married tomorrow if you want. Ill invite the duke and all of his followers. Go get Aliena readybecause, look, here comes my Rosalind.	You have my consent. Let your wedding be tomorrow. Thither will I invite the duke and alls contented followers. Go you and prepare Aliena, for look you, here comes my Rosalind.
Hello, brother.	(as Ganymede) God save you, brother.
And hello to you, fair sister.	And you, fair sister.
Oh, darling Orlando, its so hard to see you wearing your heart in a sling.	O my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thyheart in a scarf.
Tomorrow is the happy day, Audrey. Well be married tomorrow.	Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey. Tomorrow will we bemarried.
I cant wait. I hope it doesnt make me unchaste that I reallywant to be a married woman.	I do desire it with all my heart, and I hope it is no dishonestdesire to desire to be a woman of the world.
	
Good afternoon, good gentleman.	Well met, honest gentleman.
It really is good to see you. Come, sit, sit, and sing me a song.	By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.
Sounds good to us. Sit between us.	We are for you. Sit i' th' middle.
Should we just get down to it? Should we skip all that hacking and spitting and saying that were hoarse, which only makes clear what lousy singers we are?	Shall we clap into t roundly, without hawking or spitting orsaying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a badvoice?
Yes, yes, and lets sing in unison, like two gypsies riding on a single horse.	I' faith, i' faith, and both in a tune like two gypsies on ahorse.
(singing) There was a lover and his girl, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, Who walked through the cornfield In the springtime, the only proper wedding time, The time when birds sing, Hey ding-a-ding-ding. Sweet lovers love the spring. Between the acres of rye,	(sing) It was a lover and his lass, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, That o'er the green cornfield did pass In springtime, the only pretty ring time, When birds do sing, Hey ding a ding, ding. Sweet lovers love the spring. Between the acres of the rye,
Orlando, do you really believe that this boy can do everything hes promised?	Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy Can do all this that he hath promisd?
Sometimes I do and sometimes I dont. Im afraid of hoping, but I hope anyway.	I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not, As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
(as Ganymede) Be patient for a bit longer while I go over the terms of our agreement. (to DUKE SENIOR) You say that if I bring Rosalind here, you will give her to Orlando in marriage?	(as Ganymede) Patience once more whiles our compact is urged. (to DUKE SENIOR) You say, if I bring in your Rosalind, You will bestow her on Orlando here?
Yes, even if I had whole kingdoms to give along with her.	That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
(to ORLANDO) And you promise to marry her, when I bring her here?	(to ORLANDO) And you say you will have her when I bringher?
I will, even if I were king of all kingdoms.	That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
(to PHOEBE) And you say youll marry me, if Im willing to marry you?	(to PHOEBE) You say youll marry me if I be willing?
Yes, even if I die an hour later.	That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you decide not to marry me, youll marry this faithful shepherd instead? 	But if you do refuse to marry me, Youll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd? 
Continue, Solinus, and bring on my downfall. Give me the death sentence and end all my troubles.	Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall, And by the doom of death end woes and all.
Merchant of Syracuse, stop your begging: Im not inclined to bend our laws. The hatred and discord between our two cities is the result of the bitter offenses your duke has perpetrated against the merchants of Ephesus, our well-behaved countrymen. Lacking the money to ransom themselves, these merchants were executed under your dukes harsh laws, and this has erased all looks of pity from my face. Ever since these deadly conflicts erupted between your violent countrymen and ours, both you Syracusians and we Ephesians have held serious councils and decided not to permit any travel between our two hostile towns. Nothe law goes further: if anyone born in Ephesus is seen in Syracuses marketplaces or if anyone born in Syracuse comes to Ephesus, that man dies, and his possessions will be confiscated by the Duke, unless he can raise a thousand marks to pay the penalty and ransom himself. Your possessions, even if we calculate their worth very generously, dont even add up to a hundred marks. Therefore, by law, you are condemned to die.	Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more. I am not partial to infringe our laws. The enmity and discord which of late Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen, Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives, Have seald his rigorous statutes with their bloods, Excludes all pity from our threatening looks. For, since the mortal and intestine jars 'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us, It hath in solemn synods been decreed Both by the Syracusians and ourselves, To admit no traffic to our adverse towns. Nay, more, if any born at Ephesus Be seen at any Syracusian marts and fairs; Again, if any Syracusian born Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies, His goods confiscate to the Dukes dispose, Unless a thousand marks be levid To quit the penalty and to ransom him. Thy substance, valued at the highest rate, Cannot amount unto a hundred marks; Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.
At least I have this comfort: when you finish speaking, my troubles will also end, at sundown.	Yet this my comfort: when your words are done, My woes end likewise with the evening sun.
Well, Syracusian, tell usbrieflywhy you left your hometown and came to Ephesus.	Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause Why thou dep-artedst from thy native home And for what cause thou camest to Ephesus.
Asking me to speak of my unspeakable griefsthats the hardest task you could impose on me. But Ill do it so that the world can see that it was natural emotion, and not a desire to break the law, that brought me to this fate. Ill tell you whatever my sorrow permits me to say. I was born in Syracuse, and I married a womana fortunate woman, except for having been married to me. And yet I would have made her happy had our luck not been so bad. I lived with her in joy, and our wealth increased from the prosperous journeys I frequently made to Epidamnum. Then my agent died and, obligated to care for my now untended goods abroad, I was drawn away from my wifes fond embraces. I hadnt been gone for six months when my wife, almost fainting with the pains of pregnancy, made arrangements to follow me, and she soon arrived safely where I was. She hadnt been there very long before she became the joyful mother of twin boys. It was strange: they looked so much alike that the only way to tell them apart was by their names. In the same hour, and in the same inn, a poor woman also delivered identical twin boys. Their parents had very little, so I bought the boys and raised them as companions and servants for our twin sons. My wife was more than a little proud of our two boys, and every day she would press me to return home. Reluctantly, I agreedalas! Too quickly, we boarded a ship.	A heavier task could not have been imposed Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable; Yet, that the world may witness that my end Was wrought by nature, not by vile offense, Ill utter what my sorrow gives me leave. In Syracusa was I born, and wed Unto a woman happy but for me, And by me, had not our hap been bad. With her I lived in joy. Our wealth increased By prosperous voyages I often made To Epidamnum, till my factors death And the great care of goods at random left Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse; From whom my absence was not six months old Before herselfalmost at fainting under The pleasing punishment that women bear Had made provision for her following me And soon and safe arrivd where I was. There had she not been long but she became A joyful mother of two goodly sons, And, which was strange, the one so like the other As could not be distinguished but by names. That very hour, and in the selfsame inn, A meaner woman was deliverd Of such a burden, male twins, both alike. Those, for their parents were exceeding poor, I bought and brought up to attend my sons. My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, Made daily motions for our home return. Unwilling, I agreed. Alas, too soon We came aboard.
We didnt stay hopeful much longer: soon, the sky grew so dark that we were convinced we were going to die immediately. I could have accepted that, but I was forced by my wifes incessant weepingshe wept in advance for the things that she saw aheadand the piteous complaints of the sweet infantswho cried in imitation of the adults, without understanding whyto find a way to save us. Heres the best I could do: the crew of our ship had fled for safety in the lifeboats and left us to sink with the ship. My wife, who was very concerned about the younger of our twins, tied him to a spare mastthe kind that sailors use for just such a purpose. She tied one of the other twins to him. I did the same with the remaining two boys. With the children taken care of, my wife and I tied ourselves to opposite ends of the mast and floated off, obedient to the current. It carried us toward Corinthor so we thought. Eventually the sun, looking down upon the earth, burned off the threatening storm clouds. By the power of the suns wished-for light, the seas became calm. We saw two ships sailing toward us, one from Corinth, the other from Epidaurus. But before they reached uslet me say no more! Youll have to imagine what came next, based on what had already happened.	Before the always-wind-obeying deep Gave any tragic instance of our harm; But longer did we not retain much hope; For what obscured light the heavens did grant Did but convey unto our fearful minds A doubtful warrant of immediate death, Which though myself would gladly have embraced, Yet the incessant weepings of my wife, Weeping before for what she saw must come, And piteous plainings of the pretty babes, That mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear, Forced me to seek delays for them and me. And this it was, for other means was none: The sailors sought for safety by our boat And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us. My wife, more careful for the latter-born, Had fastened him unto a small spare mast, Such as seafaring men provide for storms. To him one of the other twins was bound, Whilst I had been like heedful of the other. The children thus disposed, my wife and I, Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed, Fastened ourselves at either end the mast And, floating straight, obedient to the stream, Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought. At length the sun, gazing upon the earth, Dispersed those vapors that offended us, And by the benefit of his wished light The seas waxed calm, and we discoverd Two ships from far, making amain to us, Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this. But ere they came,O, let me say no more! Gather the sequel by that went before.
No, keep going, old man; dont stop like that. For we may take pity on you, even if we cant pardon you.	Nay, forward, old man. Do not break off so, For we may pity though not pardon thee.
Had the gods taken pity on us, I wouldnt be here calling them merciless. The two ships hadnt come within ten leagues of us when our ship hit a huge rock and split down the middle. As we were unjustly separated from each other, both my wife and I were left with something to delight in and something to sorrow over. For her partthe poor soul! Her half of the mast weighed less, but she was no luckier than I was: the wind carried her away more quickly. I saw them rescued by fishermen from Corinthor so I thought. After a while, another ship rescued me and the two boys who were with me. The sailors knew me, so they took good care of us. Our ship would have caught up with the other ship and taken back my wife and the children, but we sailed too slowly and their ship sped toward their home. So now youve heard how I was separated from everything I love. Its been my bad luck to remain alive long enough to be able to tell the sad stories of my own misfortunes.	O, had the gods done so, I had not now Worthily termed them merciless to us. For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues, We were encounterd by a mighty rock, Which being violently borne upon, Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst; So that, in this unjust divorce of us, Fortune had left to both of us alike What to delight in, what to sorrow for. Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdend With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe, Was carried with more speed before the wind, And in our sight they three were taken up By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought. At length, another ship had seized on us And, knowing whom it was their hap to save, Gave healthful welcome to their shipwracked guests, And would have reft the fishers of their prey Had not their bark been very slow of sail; And therefore homeward did they bend their course. Thus have you heard me severed from my bliss; That by misfortunes was my life prolonged To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
And for the sake of those you grieve for, do me a favor: tell me the full story of what has happened to you and them, up to this point.	And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for, Do me the favour to dilate at full What hath befall'n of them and thee till now.
My youngest son, whom I care about the most, turned eighteen and started to wonder about his twin brother. He asked me to let him take his attendantwho had also lost a brother, though he had kept his brothers	My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care, At eighteen years became inquisitive After his brother, and importuned me That his attendantso his case was like,
	Might bear him company in the quest of him, Whom whilst I laboured of a love to see, I hazarded the loss of whom I loved. Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece, Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia, And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus, Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought Or that or any place that harbors men. But here must end the story of my life; And happy were I in my timely death Could all my travels warrant me they live.
Poor Egeon! Fate has decreed that you must endure the extremes of terrible misfortune. Believe me, if it werent against the law, my crown, my duty, and my position (which princes cannot disobey, not matter how they feel), my very soul would argue your case. But you are sentenced to death, and changing a sentence thats already been passed would dishonor my title. However, Ill do what I can for you. I will allow you one day to look for help in Ephesus. Call any friends you have. Beg or borrow to come up with the ransom. If you can, you live. If not, you are doomed to die. Jailer, take him into custody.	Hapless Egeon, whom the fates have marked To bear the extremity of dire mishap, Now, trust me, were it not against our laws, Against my crown, my oath, my dignity, Which princes, would they, may not disannul, My soul would sue as advocate for thee. But though thou art adjudgd to the death, And passd sentence may not be recalled But to our honours great disparagement, Yet will I favor thee in what I can. Therefore, merchant, Ill limit thee this day To seek thy life by beneficial help. Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus; Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum, And live. If no, then thou art doomd to die. Jailer, take him to thy custody.
I will.	I will, my lord.
Hopeless and helpless, I go my way, merely putting off my fatal end.	Hopeless and helpless doth Egeon wend, But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
So, tell people that youre from Epidamnumotherwise all your goods will be confiscated. Just today, a merchant from Syracuse was arrested for coming here. He couldnt afford the ransom, so by law, hell be put to death before the sun sets. Heres the money you asked me to hold.	Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum, Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate. This very day a Syracusian merchant Is apprehended for arrival here And, not being able to buy out his life, According to the statute of the town Dies ere the weary sun set in the west. There is your money that I had to keep.
Dromio, bring this money to the Centaur Inn, where were lodging, and wait there until I come. Itll be lunchtime within an hour. Until then, Ill walk around town, peruse the markets, and gaze upon the buildings, and then Ill return and sleep at the inn. Im stiff and weary from all this travel. Get going now.	Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host, And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee. Within this hour it will be dinnertime. Till that, Ill view the manners of the town, Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings, And then return and sleep within mine inn, For with long travel I am stiff and weary. Get thee away.
Many men would take you literally and take off with all this money.	Many a man would take you at your word And go indeed, having so good a mean.
Hes a trustworthy servant. Often, when Im dulled by worry and melancholy, he lightens my mood with his merry pranks. Listen, will you walk with me around the town and then dine with me at the inn?	A trusty villain, sir, that very oft, When I am dull with care and melancholy, Lightens my humor with his merry jests. What, will you walk with me about the town And then go to my inn and dine with me?
Begging your pardon, but Ive been invited to see some merchants, who Im hoping to see a profit from. But if	I am invited, sir, to certain merchants, Of whom I hope to make much benefit.
Neither my husband nor the slave has returned, even though I sent the slave off running. Surely, Luciana, its already two o'clock.	Neither my husband nor the slave returned That in such haste I sent to seek his master? Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock.
Maybe some merchant at the marketplace invited him home for lunch. Sister, lets eat and stop worrying. A man is master of his own freedom: time is his only master, and when the right moment comes along, hell come or go as he pleases. If this is so, be patient, sister.	Perhaps some merchant hath invited him, And from the mart hes somewhere gone to dinner. Good sister, let us dine and never fret. A man is master of his liberty; Time is their master, and when they see time Theyll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.
Why should men be more free than women?	Why should their liberty than ours be more?
Because their business lies outside the home.	Because their business still lies out o' door.
Listen, when I behave this way toward him, he hates it.	Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.
Oh, you should know that hes the bridlebridle = muzzlelike device used to restrain a horsebridle to your will.	O, know he is the bridle of your will.
Only a mule would agree to that.	Theres none but asses will be bridled so.
Why, too much freedom leads to woe. Theres nothing under heaven that doesnt have its limits. The beasts on the earth, the fish in the sea, and the birds in the sky are all subject to the males of their species and under their control. Men, who are nearest to God, are the masters of all these creatures. And menthe lords of the wide	Why, headstrong liberty is lashed with woe. Theres nothing situate under heavens eye But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky. The beasts, the fishes, and the wingd fowls Are their males' subjects and at their controls. Man, more divine, the masters of all these,
The gold I gave Dromio is safe and sound at the Centaur, and the inn host says that Dromio has left and is looking for me. I havent spoken to him since I sent him away from the marketplace earlier. Here he comes.	The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave Is wandered forth, in care to seek me out. By computation and mine hosts report, I could not speak with Dromio since at first I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.
	As you love strokes, so jest with me again. You know no Centaur? You received no gold? Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner? My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad, That thus so madly thou didst answer me?
Said what, sir? When did I say all that?	What answer, sir? When spake I such a word?
Just now. Right here. Less than half an hour ago.	Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
I havent seen you since you sent me to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.	I did not see you since you sent me hence, Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.
You moron, you denied having any gold, and you told me about a mistress and a lunch. And I hope you realized I wasnt very happy about it.	Villain, thou didst deny the golds receipt And toldst me of a mistress and a dinner, For which, I hope, thou feltst I was displeased.
Im glad to see you in such a merry mood. But whats the joke? Please, master, tell me.	I am glad to see you in this merry vein. What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me?
Signior Angelo, please excuse us. My wife gets angry when Im late. Heres the story well tell her: that I was with you at your shop, watching you make her necklace, and that youre going to deliver it tomorrow. But here comes a scoundrel who says he saw me at the marketplace and that I beat on him, told him Id given him a thousand marks in gold, and then lied about my wife and my house. You drunkard, what was that all about?	Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all; My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours. Say that I lingered with you at your shop To see the making of her carcanet, And that tomorrow you will bring it home. But heres a villain that would face me down He met me on the mart, and that I beat him And charged him with a thousand marks in gold, And that I did deny my wife and house. Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?
Say what you want, but I know what I know. You beat me at the marketplace, and I have the bruises to prove it. If my skin were paper and your punches were ink, you could read the beating on my body.	Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know. That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show; If the skin were parchment and the blows you gave were ink, Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
I think youre an ass.	I think thou art an ass.
Honestly, it sure looks that way, judging by all the beatings and the bad treatment Im getting. Since Im an ass, I ought to kick like one. Then youd be scared of me and keep away.	Marry, so it doth appear By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear. I should kick being kicked; and, being at that pass, You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
Signior Balthasar, you look upset. I hope the good meal Im going to give you will show the goodwill I bear you and how welcome you are.	Youre sad, Signior Balthasar. Pray God our cheer May answer my good will and your good welcome here.
Have you completely forgotten your duty as a husband? Antipholus, your marriage is still fresh and new, like the springtimehave the young shoots of your love already started to wither? Is the building of your love already in ruins? If you married my sister for her wealth, then for her wealths sake, treat her with more kindness. Or if your affection has already strayed to another woman, at least be stealthy about it. Hide your false love, blindfold yourself so my sister cannot read your faithlessness in your eyes. Watch what you say, and dont let your own words give away your shame. Look sweet and act kindlybe attractive in your disloyalty. Disguise your misbehavior as integrity, and behave properly even if your heart is tainted. Though you are sinful, carry yourself like a holy saint. Be false in secret: why does she need to know? What foolish thief brags about his crimes? Its doubly wrong to cheat on your wife and then let her see the offense in your eyes. When you do something shameful, its possible to put a good spin on it, but bad deeds are made worse by speaking of them. Alas, poor women! Were so gullible, we believe it when you say you love us. Even if you love someone else in your heart, make it appear as if you love us. We follow in your orbit, and you have the power to move us. So, my sweet brother-in-law, go inside. Comfort my sister, cheer her up, call her wife. Its a holy thing to lie a little when sweet flattery can smooth over trouble.	And may it be that you have quite forgot A husbands office? Shall, Antipholus, Even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot? Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous? If you did wed my sister for her wealth, Then for her wealths sake use her with more kindness. Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth Muffle your false love with some show of blindness. Let not my sister read it in your eye; Be not thy tongue thy own shames orator; Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty; Apparel vice like virtues harbinger. Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted. Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint. Be secret-false. What need she be acquainted? What simple thief brags of his own attaint? 'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed And let her read it in thy looks at board. Shame hath a bastard fame, well managd; Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word. Alas, poor women, make us but believe, Being compact of credit, that you love us. Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve; We in your motion turn, and you may move us. Then, gentle brother, get you in again. Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife. 'Tis holy sport to be a little vain When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
Sweet mistressI dont know what other name to give you, or how youve figured out mineyou seem as	Sweet mistresswhat your name is else I know not, Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,
Youve owed me this money since the Pentecost holiday. I havent pressed you for it, and I wouldnt now except that Im going to Persia and I need money for the trip. So pay me now, or Ill have this officer arrest you.	You know since Pentecost the sum is due, And since I have not much importuned you, Nor now I had not, but that I am bound To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage. Therefore make present satisfaction, Or Ill attach you by this officer.
Antipholus owes me the exact amount that I owe you. Just before I ran into you, I gave him a necklace. At five o'clock hes going to pay me for it. Please, come to his house with me. Ill pay what I owe you then and say thank you as well.	Even just the sum that I do owe to you Is growing to me by Antipholus. And in the instant that I met with you, He had of me a chain. At five o'clock I shall receive the money for the same. Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house, I will discharge my bond and thank you too.
He saves you the trouble: look, here he comes.	That labor may you save. See where he comes.
(to DROMIO) Im going to the jewelers house. You go buy a piece of ropeIll whip my wife and her cohorts for locking me out of my own house. Wait a minute! I see the jeweler. Go, be gone with you. Buy a rope and bring it to me.	While I go to the goldsmiths house, go thou And buy a ropes end. That will I bestow Among my wife and her confederates For locking me out of my doors by day. But soft. I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone. Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.
Oh, Luciana, did he tempt you like that? Could you tell from his face if he was serious? Yes or no? Did he look flushed or pale? Sad or happy? Could you tell from his looks what he was feeling in his heart?	Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so? Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye That he did plead in earnest, yea or no? Looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily? What observation madst thou in this case Of his hearts meteors tilting in his face?
First, he said you had no right to him.	First he denied you had in him no right.
He meant he did nothing right for mewhich is true, unfortunately.	He meant he did me none; the more my spite.
Then he swore he was a stranger here.	Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
And thats truehe is being strange. And yet he lies as well, for hes no stranger.	And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
Then I pleaded for you.	Then pleaded I for you.
And what did he say?	And what said he?
That he felt for me the love that I begged him to feel for you.	That love i begged for you he begged of me.
How did he try to persuade you to love him?	With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
With words thatif they were spoken honestlymight have moved me. First, he praised my beauty, then my eloquence.	With words that in an honest suit might move. First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Did you praise him as well?	Didst speak him fair?
Every person I meet greets me like an old friend, and every one of them knows my name. Some of them give me money, some invite me places, some thank me for the kind things Ive done for them, some try to sell me things. Just now a tailor showed me fabrics he bought especially for me and then started to take my measurements. These are tricks of the imagination, and this place is filled with magicians.	Theres not a man I meet but doth salute me As if I were their well-acquainted friend, And every one doth call me by my name. Some tender money to me; some invite me; Some other give me thanks for kindnesses; Some offer me commodities to buy. Even now a tailor called me in his shop And showed me silks that he had bought for me, And therewithal took measure of my body. Sure, these are but imaginary wiles, And lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
Heres the money you wanted, master. Hey, have you gotten rid of that AdamDromio calls the officer Adam because, after Adam and Eve were expelled from Eden, Adam wore clothing made of skins, llike the officers leather uniform.Adam?	Master, heres The gold you sent me for. What, have you gotthe picture of old Adam new-appareled?
What gold is this? Whos this Adam you speak of?	What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?
Not the Adam from the garden of Eden, but the Adam from the jailhouse. The one that wears leather clothes. The one that grabbed you and arrested you.	Not that Adam that kept the Paradise, but that Adam thatkeeps the prison; he that goes in the calfs skin that waskilled for the Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like anevil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.
I dont know what youre talking about.	I understand thee not.
Dont worry, man, I wont try to escape. When its time for me to be freed, Ill pay you the fee youre entitled to for arresting me. My wifes in a perverse mood today. Shell be suspicious when the messenger tells her that I was arrested. I tell you, this will make her angry when she hears about it.	Fear me not, man. I will not break away: Ill give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money, To warrant thee, as I am rested for. My wife is in a wayward mood today And will not lightly trust the messenger That I should be attached in Ephesus. I tell you, twill sound harshly in her ears.
	How now, sir? Have you that I sent you for?
Yes. And this rope will take care of everybody, I guarantee it.	Heres that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
But wheres the money?	But wheres the money?
Why, sir, I spent it on this rope.	Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
You idiot! Five hundred ducats for a rope?	Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
I can get you five hundred ropes for that price.	Ill serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
Why did I just send you home?	To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
To get a piece of rope. And here I am, with that piece.	To a ropes end, sir, and to that end am I returned.
And Ill use that piece of rope to welcome you with. (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS)	And to that end, sir, I will welcome you. (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS)
Im sorry that I delayed you, sir. But even though he denies it, I swear he got the necklace from me.	I am sorry, sir, that I have hindered you, But I protest he had the chain of me, Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
Whats this mans reputation like here in the city?	How is the man esteemed here in the city?
People think very highly of him. The merchants give him unlimited credit. Hes well beloved, second to none in the city. Id trust him with everything I own.	Of very reverend reputation, sir, Of credit infinite, highly beloved, Second to none that lives here in the city. His word might bear my wealth at any time.
Speak more quietly: I think hes coming this way.	Speak softly. Yonder, as I think, he walks.
Youre right. And that necklace around his neck is the very one he swore he didnt have! Good sir, stay close to me. Ill speak to him. Signior Antipholus, I cant believe youd put me to this kind of shame and troublenot to mention the scandal youve brought on yourself. You swore I never gave you the necklace, but now youre wearing it openly. Not only has your lie cost you money, shame, and imprisonment, but youve also mistreated this honest friend of mine. If it hadnt been for this dispute, he would have already hoisted sail and left for sea. You got that necklace from me: can you deny that? 	'Tis so; and that self chain about his neck Which he forswore most monstrously to have. Good sir, draw near to me. Ill speak to him. Signior Antipholus, I wonder much That you would put me to this shame and trouble, And not without some scandal to yourself, With circumstance and oaths so to deny This chain, which now you wear so openly. Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment, You have done wrong to this my honest friend, Who, but for staying on our controversy, Had hoisted sail and put to sea today. This chain you had of me. Can you deny it? 
Whos there?	Whos there?
No, who are you? Stop and identify yourself.	Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Long live the king!	Long live the king!
Is that Barnardo?	Barnardo?
Yes, its me.	He.
Youve come right on time.	You come most carefully upon your hour.
The clocks just striking twelve. Go home to bed, Francisco.	'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
Thanks for letting me go. Its bitterly cold out, and Im depressed.	For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.
Has it been a quiet night?	Have you had quiet guard?
I havent even heard a mouse squeak.	Not a mouse stirring.
Well, good night. If you happen to see Horatio and Marcellus, who are supposed to stand guard with me tonight, tell them to hurry.	Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
I think I hear them. Stop! Whos there?	I think I hear them.Stand, ho! Whos there?
Friends of this country.	Friends to this ground.
And servants of the Danish king.	And liegemen to the Dane.
Good night to you both.	Give you good night.
Good-bye. Whos taken over the watch for you?	O, farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved you?
Barnardos taken my place. Good night.	Barnardo has my place. Give you good night.
Hello, Barnardo.	Holla, Barnardo.
Hello. Is Horatio here too?	Say what, is Horatio there?
More or less.	A piece of him.
Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, Marcellus.	Welcome, Horatio.Welcome, good Marcellus.
So, tell us, did you see that thing again tonight?	What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
I havent seen anything.	I have seen nothing.
Horatio says were imagining it, and wont let himself believe anything about this horrible thing that weve seen twice now. Thats why Ive begged him to come on our shift tonight, so that if the ghost appears he can see what we see and speak to it.	Horatio says tis but our fantasy And will not let belief take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us. Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night, That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Oh, nonsense. Its not going to appear.	Tush, tush, twill not appear.
Sit down for a while, and well tell you again the story you dont want to believe, about what weve seen two nights now.	Sit down a while And let us once again assail your ears, That are so fortified against our story, What we have two nights seen.
Well, lets sit down and listen to Barnardo tell us.	Well, sit we down, And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
Last night, when that star to the west of the North Star had traveled across the night sky to that point where its shining now, at one o'clock, Marcellus and I	Last night of all, When yond same star thats westward from the pole Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one
Quiet, shut up! Its come again.	Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again!
Looking just like the dead king.	In the same figure like the king thats dead.
(to HORATIO) Youre well-educated, Horatio. Say something to it.	(to HORATIO) Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
Doesnt he look like the king, Horatio?	Looks it not like the king? Mark it, Horatio.
Very much so. Its terrifying.	Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
It wants us to speak to it.	It would be spoke to.
Ask it something, Horatio.	Question it, Horatio.
What are you, that you walk out so late at night, looking like the dead king of Denmark when he dressed for battle? By God, I order you to speak.	What art thou that usurpst this time of night Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee, speak.
It looks like youve offended it.	It is offended.
Look, its going away.	See, it stalks away.
Stay! Speak! Speak! I order you, speak!	Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!
Its gone. It wont answer now.	'Tis gone and will not answer.
Whats going on, Horatio? Youre pale and trembling. You agree now that were not imagining this, dont you? What do you think about it?	How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale. Is not this something more than fantasy? What think you on t?
I swear to God, if I hadnt seen this with my own eyes Id never believe it.	Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.
Doesnt it look like the king?	Is it not like the king?
Yes, as much as you look like yourself. The king was wearing exactly this armor when he fought the king of Norway. And the ghost frowned just like the king did once when he attacked the Poles, traveling on the ice in sleds. Its weird.	As thou art to thyself. Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated. So frowned he once when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. 'Tis strange.
Its happened like this twice before, always at this exact time. He stalks by us at our post like a warrior.	Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
I dont know exactly how to explain this, but I have a general feeling this means bad news for our country.	In what particular thought to work I know not, But in the gross and scope of mine opinion This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
All right, lets sit down and discuss that question. Somebody tell me why this strict schedule of guards has been imposed, and why so many bronze cannons are being manufactured in Denmark, and so many weapons bought from abroad, and why the shipbuilders are so busy they dont even rest on Sunday. Is something about to happen that warrants working this night and day? Who can explain this to me?	Good now, sit down and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon And foreign mart for implements of war, Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week. What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint laborer with the day? Who is t that can inform me?
I can. Or at least I can describe the rumors. As you know, our late king, whom we just now saw as a ghost, was the great rival of Fortinbras, king of Norway. Fortinbras dared him to battle. In that fight, our courageous Hamlet (or at least thats how we thought of him) killed old King Fortinbras, whoon the basis of a valid legal documentsurrendered all his territories, along with his life, to his conqueror. If our king had lost, he would have had to do the same. But now old Fortinbrass young son, also called Fortinbrashe is bold, but unprovenhas gathered a bunch of thugs from the lawless outskirts of the country. For some food, theyre eager to take on the tough enterprise of securing the lands the elder Fortinbras lost.	That can I. At least, the whisper goes so: our last king, Whose image even but now appeared to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet (For so this side of our known world esteemed him) Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of to the conqueror, Against the which a moiety competent Was gagd by our king, which had returned To the inheritance of Fortinbras Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant And carriage of the article designed, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimprovd mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in t, which is no other As it doth well appear unto our state But to recover of us, by strong hand
	So by his father lost. And this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
I think thats exactly rightthat explains why the ghost of the late king would haunt us now, since he caused these wars.	I think it be no other but e'en so. Well may it sort that this portentous figure Comes armd through our watch so like the king That was and is the question of these wars.
The ghost is definitely something to worry about. In the high and mighty Roman Empire, just before the emperor Julius Caesar was assassinated, corpses rose out of their graves and ran through the streets of Rome speaking gibberish. There were shooting stars, and blood mixed in with the morning dew, and threatening signs on the face of the sun. The moon, which controls the tides of the sea, was so eclipsed it almost went completely out. And weve had similar omens of terrible things to come, as if heaven and earth have joined together to warn us whats going to happen.	A mote it is to trouble the minds eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun, and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptunes empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. And even the like precurse of feared events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.
	Ill cross it though it blast me.Stay, illusion!
	Speak to me.
	That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy countrys fate, Which happily foreknowing may avoid, Oh, speak! Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay and speak!
	
Should I strike it with my spear?	Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
Yes, if it doesnt stand still.	Do, if it will not stand.
Its over here.	'Tis here.
There it is.	'Tis here.
Its gone. We were wrong to threaten it with violence, since it looks so much like a king. Besides, we cant hurt it anymore than we can hurt the air. Our attack was stupid, futile, and wicked.	'Tis gone. We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence, For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.
It was about to say something when the rooster crowed.	It was about to speak when the cock crew.
And then it acted startled, like a guilty person caught by the law. Ive heard that the rooster awakens the god of day with its trumpetlike crowing, and makes all wandering ghosts, wherever they are, hurry back to their hiding places. Weve just seen proof of that.	And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day, and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine, and of the truth herein This present object made probation.
Yes, it faded away when the rooster crowed. Some people say that just before Christmas the rooster crows all night long, so that no ghost dares go wandering, and the night is safe. The planets have no sway over us, fairies' spells dont work, and witches cant bewitch us. Thats how holy that night is.	It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviours birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night long. And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad. The nights are wholesome. Then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
Yes, Ive heard the same thing and sort of believe it. But look, morning is breaking beyond that hill in the east, turning the sky red. Lets interrupt our watch and go tell young Hamlet what weve seen tonight. Im sure this ghost thats so silent with us will speak to him. Dont you agree that we owe it to him to tell him about this, out of duty and love?	So have I heard and do in part believe it. But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill. Break we our watch up, and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen tonight Unto young Hamlet, for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Lets do it. I know where well find him this morning.	Lets do t, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall find him most conveniently.
Although I still have fresh memories of my brother the elder Hamlets death, and though it was proper to mourn him throughout our kingdom, life still goes onI think its wise to mourn him while also thinking about my own well being. Therefore, Ive married my former sister-in-law, the queen, with mixed feelings of happiness and sadness. I know that in marrying Gertrude Im only doing what all of you have wisely advised all alongfor which I thank you. Now, down to business. You all know whats happening. Young Fortinbras, underestimating my strength or imagining that the death of the king has thrown my country into turmoil, dreams of getting the better of me, and never stops pestering me with demands that I surrender the territory his father lost to the elder Hamlet, my dead brother-in-law. So much for Fortinbras.	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brothers death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have weas twere with a defeated joy, With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For all, our thanks. Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth Or thinking by our late dear brothers death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagud with the dream of his advantage, He hath not failed to pester us with message Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
	
My belongings are on the ship already. Good-bye. And, my dear sister, as long as the winds are blowing and ships are sailing, let me hear from youwrite.	My necessaries are embarked. Farewell. And, sister, as the winds give benefit And convey is assistant, do not sleep, But let me hear from you.
Do you doubt Ill write?	Do you doubt that?
As for Hamlet and his attentions to you, just consider it a big flirtation, the temporary phase of a hot-blooded youth. It wont last. Its sweet, but his affection will fade after a minute. Not a second more.	For Hamlet and the trifling of his favor, Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, The perfume and suppliance of a minute. No more.
No more than a minute?	No more but so?
Try to think of it like that, anyway. When a youth grows into a man, he doesnt just get bigger in his bodyhis responsibilities grow too. He may love you now, and may have only the best intentions, but you have to be on your guard. Remember that he belongs to the royal family, and his intentions dont matter that muchhes a slave to his family obligations. He cant simply make personal choices for himself the way common people can, since the whole country depends on what he does. His choice has to agree with what the nation wants.	Think it no more. For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will, but you must fear. His greatness weighed, his will is not his own, For he himself is subject to his birth. He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself, for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state. And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
The air is biting cold.	The air bites shrewdly. It is very cold.
Yes, its definitely nippy.	It is a nipping and an eager air.
What time is it?	What hour now?
A little before twelve, I think.	I think it lacks of twelve.
No, its just after twelve; I heard the clock strike.	No, it is struck.
Really? I didnt hear it. So its nearly the time when the ghost likes to appear.	Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
	
The king is staying up all night drinking and dancing. As he guzzles down his German wine, the musicians make a ruckus to celebrate his draining another cup.	The king doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail and the swaggering upspring reels, And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.
Is that a tradition?	Is it a custom?
Yes, it is. But though I was born here and should consider that tradition part of my own heritage, I think it would be better to ignore it than practice it. Other countries criticize us for our loud partying.	Ay, marry, is t. But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honored in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
Where are you taking me? Speak. Im not going any farther.	Where wilt thou lead me? Speak, Ill go no further.
Listen to me.	Mark me.
I will.	I will.
The hour has almost come when I have to return to the horrible flames of purgatory.	My hour is almost come When I to sulfurous and tormenting flames Must render up myself.
Ah, poor ghost!	Alas, poor ghost!
Dont pity me. Just listen carefully to what I have to tell you.	Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall unfold.
Speak. Im ready to hear you.	Speak. I am bound to hear.
You must be ready for revenge, too, when you hear me out.	So art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear.
What?	What?
Im the ghost of your father, doomed for a certain period of time to walk the earth at night, while during the day Im trapped in the fires of purgatory until Ive done penance for my past sins. If I werent forbidden to tell you the secrets of purgatoryAccording to Catholic doctrine, purgatory is a place where souls go to be punished for their sins before going to heaven.purgatory, I could tell you stories that would slice through your soul, freeze your blood,	I am thy fathers spirit, Doomed for a certain term to walk the night And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Give him this money and these letters, Reynaldo.	Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
I will, sir.	I will, my lord.
It would be wonderfully wise of you, my dear Reynaldo, to ask around about his behavior a little before you visit him.	You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo, Before you visit him, to make inquire Of his behavior.
Thats what I thought too, sir.	My lord, I did intend it.
Excellent, very good. Ask around and find out what Danish people are in Pariswho they are, where they live and how much money they have, who their friends are. And if you find out in this general sort of questioning that they happen to know my son, youll find out much more than if you asked specific questions about him. Just tell them you vaguely know Laertes, say something like, Im a friend of his father and I sort of know him, or whatever. Do you get what Im saying, Reynaldo?	Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir, Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris, And how, and who, what means, and where they keep What company at what expense; and finding By this encompassment and drift of question That they do know my son, come you more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it. Take you, as twere, some distant knowledge of him, As thus: I know his father and his friends, And, in part, him. Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
Yes, very well, sir.	Ay, very well, my lord.
You should say, I sort of know him, but not well. Is it the same Laertes whos a wild party animal? Isnt he the one whos always, and so on. Then just make up whatever you wantof course, nothing so bad that it would shame him. I mean make up any stories that	And in part him, but, you may say, not well. But, if t be he I mean, hes very wild. Addicted so and so. And there put on him What forgeries you please. Marry, none so rank As may dishonor him. Take heed of that. But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Ive wanted to see you for a long time now, but I sent for you so hastily because I need your help right away. Youve probably heard about the change thats come over Hamletthats the only word for it, since inside and out hes different from what he was before. I cant imagine whats made him so unlike himself, other than his fathers death. Since you both grew up with him and are so familiar with his personality and behavior, Im asking you to stay a while at court and spend some time with him. See if you can get Hamlet to have some fun, and find out if theres anything in particular thats bothering him, so we can set about trying to fix it.	Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlets transformationso call it Since nor th' exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his fathers death, that thus hath put him So much from th' understanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entreat you both That, being of so young days brought up with him And since so neighbored to his youth and 'havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus That, opened, lies within our remedy.
Gentlemen, Hamlets talked a lot about you, and I know there are no two men alive hes fonder of. If youll be so good as to spend some time with us and help us out, youll be thanked on a royal scale.	Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you. And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us awhile For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a kings remembrance.
And you cant put your heads together and figure out why hes acting so dazed and confused, ruining his peace and quiet with such dangerous displays of lunacy?	And can you by no drift of conference Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
He admits he feels confused, but refuses to say why.	He does confess he feels himself distracted. But from what cause he will by no means speak.
And hes not exactly eager to be interrogated. Hes very sly and dances around our questions when we try to get him to talk about how he feels.	Nor do we find him forward to be sounded. But with a crafty madness keeps aloof When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.
Did he treat you well when you saw him?	Did he receive you well?
Yes, in a very gentlemanly way.	Most like a gentleman.
But it seemed like he had to force himself to be nice to us.	But with much forcing of his disposition.
He didnt ask questions, but answered ours at length.	Niggard of question, but of our demands Most free in his reply.
Did you try tempting him with some entertainment?	Did you assay him? To any pastime?
Madam, some actors happened to cross our paths on the way here. We told Hamlet about them, and that seemed to do him good.	Madam, it so fell out, that certain players We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him, And there did seem in him a kind of joy
Perform the speech just as I taught you, musically and smoothly. If you exaggerate the words the way some actors do, I might as well have some newscaster read the lines. Dont use too many hand gestures; just do a few, gently, like this. When you get into a whirlwind of passion on stage, remember to keep the emotion moderate and smooth. I hate it when I hear a blustery actor in a wig tear a passion to shreds, bursting everyones eardrums so as to impress the audience on the lower levels of the playhouse, who for the most part can only appreciate loud noises and pantomime shows. I would whip a guy for making a tyrant sound too tyrannical. Thats as bad as those old plays in which King Herod ranted. Please avoid doing that.	Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many ofyour players do, I had as lief the town crier spoke my lines.Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, butuse all gently, for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I maysay) whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget atemperance that may give it smoothness. Oh, it offends meto the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear apassion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of thegroundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothingbut inexplicable dumb-shows and noise. I would have sucha fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-HerodsHerod. Pray you, avoid it.
I will, sir.	I warrant your honor.
But dont be too tame, eitherlet your good sense guide you. Fit the action to the word and the word to the action. Act natural at all costs. Exaggeration has no place in the theater, where the purpose is to represent reality, holding a mirror up to virtue, to vice, and to the spirit of the times. If you handle this badly, it just makes ignorant people laugh while regular theater-goers are miserableand theyre the ones you should be keeping happy.	Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be yourtutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action,with this special observance that you o'erstep not themodesty of nature. For anything so overdone is from thepurpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now,was and is to hold, as twere, the mirror up to nature, toshow virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and thevery age and body of the time his form and pressure. Nowthis overdone or come tardy off, though it make theunskillful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, thecensure of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigha whole theatre of others.
I dont like the way hes acting, and its not safe for me to let his insanity get out of control. So get prepared. Im sending you to England on diplomatic business, and Hamlet will go with you. As king, I cannot risk the danger he represents as he grows crazier by the hour.	I like him not, nor stands it safe with us To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you. I your commission will forthwith dispatch, And he to England shall along with you. The terms of our estate may not endure Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow Out of his lunacies.
Well take care of it. Its a sacred duty to protect the lives of all those who depend on Your Highness.	We will ourselves provide. Most holy and religious fear it is To keep those many, many bodies safe That live and feed upon your majesty.
Everyone tries to avoid harm, but the public figure demands even more protection. When a great leader dies he doesnt die alone but, like a whirlpool, draws others with him. Hes like a huge wheel on the top of the highest mountain whose spokes touch the rim of ten thousand smaller thingswhen it falls down the mountain, every little object goes down with it. Whenever a king sighs, everyone groans.	The single and peculiar life is bound With all the strength and armor of the mind To keep itself from noyance, but much more That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest The lives of many. The cease of majesty Dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw Whats near it with it. It is a massy wheel Fixed on the summit of the highest mount, To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls, Each small annexment, petty consequence, Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Prepare yourself, please, for this trip. Well put a leash on this danger thats now running wild.	Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage. For we will fetters put upon this fear, Which now goes too free-footed.
Hell come right away. Make sure you lay into him. Tell him his pranks have caused too much trouble, and that Your Highness has taken a lot of heat for them. Ill be right here, silent. Please be blunt with him.	He will come straight. Look you lay home to him. Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, And that your grace hath screened and stood between Much heat and him. Ill silence me even here. Pray you, be round with him.
(offstage) Mother, mother, mother!	(within) Mother, mother, mother!
Dont worry, Ill do what you say. Now hide, I hear him coming.	Ill warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw, I hear him coming.
Now mother, whats this all about?	Now mother, whats the matter?
Hamlet, youve insulted your father.	Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, youve insulted my father.	Mother, you have my father much offended.
Come on, youre answering me foolishly.	Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Go on, youre questioning me evilly.	Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Hamlet, what, why?	Why, how now, Hamlet?
Whats the problem now?	Whats the matter now?
Have you forgotten who I am?	Have you forgot me?
For Gods sake no, I havent. You are the queen, your husbands brothers wife, and you are my mother, though I wish you werent.	No, by the rood, not so. You are the queen, your husbands brothers wife, Andwould it were not so!you are my mother.
(to GERTRUDE) These deep, heaving sighs of yours mean something. You have to tell me what. I need to know. Wheres your son?	(to GERTRUDE) Theres matter in these sighs, these profound heaves. You must translate. 'Tis fit we understand them. Where is your son?
(to ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN) Let us speak privately awhile, please.	(to ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN) Bestow this place on us a little while.
	
What, Gertrude? How is Hamlet?	What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
As mad as the waves and the wind when they struggle together in a storm. In an insane rage, he hears something behind the tapestry, whips out his sword, shouts, A rat, a rat! and in his deranged state of mind he kills the good old man, who is still hidden.	Mad as the sea and wind when both contend Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit, Behind the arras hearing something stir, Whips out his rapier, cries, A rat, a rat! And in this brainish apprehension kills The unseen good old man.
Oh, this is terrible! It wouldve happened to me if Id been there. His wildness is a threat to all of usto you, to me, to everyone. How will we deal with this violent deed? Im the one who will be blamed for not restraining and confining this mad young man. But I loved him so much I didnt want to think about what I had to do. So, like someone suffering from a nasty disease who refuses to divulge his condition and lets it infect him to	O heavy deed! It had been so with us, had we been there. His liberty is full of threats to all To you yourself, to us, to everyone. Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered? It will be laid to us, whose providence Should have kept short, restrained and out of haunt, This mad young man. But so much was our love, We would not understand what was most fit,
The body is safely hidden.	Safely stowed.
(from offstage) Hamlet, Lord Hamlet!	(from within) Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
Whats that noise? Whos calling for Hamlet? Oh, here they come.	But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet? Oh, here they come.
What have you done with the corpse, my lord?	What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
Ive gotten it dirtyashes to ashes, and dust to dust.	Compounded it with dust, whereto tis kin.
But tell us where it is, so we can take it to the chapel.	Tell us where tis, that we may take it thence And bear it to the chapel.
Dont believe it.	Do not believe it.
Believe what?	Believe what?
That Id take your advice rather than keep my own secret. Besides, youre a sponge! What is the son of a king supposed to say to a sponge?	That I can keep your counsel and not mine own. Besides, tobe demanded of a sponge! What replication should be madeby the son of a king?
You think Im a sponge, my lord?	Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
Ive sent men to find him and retrieve the body. How dangerous to have this madman on the loose! But we cant throw him in jail. The people love him, because they judge based on appearance rather than reason. Theyll pay attention to the severity of the punishment, not the severity of the crime. No, we must seem calm and fair-minded, and our sending him away must seem like a carefully considered move. But a terminal disease requires extreme treatment, or nothing at all.	I have sent to seek him and to find the body. How dangerous is it that this man goes loose! Yet must not we put the strong law on him. Hes loved of the distracted multitude, Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes. And where tis so, th' offenders scourge is weighed, But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even, This sudden sending him away must seem Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown By desperate appliance are relieved, Or not at all.
	
We cant get him to tell us where hes put the body.	Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord, We cannot get from him.
But where is he?	But where is he?
Outside, my lord, under guard, waiting for your orders.	Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
Bring him to me.	Bring him before us.
Hey, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.	Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
Now, Hamlet, wheres Polonius?	Now, Hamlet, wheres Polonius?
Go, Captain, and give the Danish king my greetings. Tell him that Fortinbras asks permission to move his troops across Denmark. You know the meeting place weve arranged. If His Majesty wants us to do any favor for him, tell him his wish is my command.	Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king Tell him that, by his license, Fortinbras Craves the conveyance of a promised march Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous. If that his majesty would aught with us, We shall express our duty in his eye, And let him know so.
Ill tell him, my lord.	I will do t, my lord.
Go ahead, then.	Go softly on.
Sir, whose troops are these?	Good sir, whose powers are these?
The king of Norways, sir.	They are of Norway, sir.
What are they doing here, sir?	How purposed, sir, I pray you?
Theyre on their way to invade some part of Poland.	Against some part of Poland.
Whos commanding them, sir?	Who commands them, sir?
The nephew of the old king of Norway, Fortinbras.	The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
Is he attacking the heartland of Poland or some frontier?	Goes it against the main of Poland, sir, Or for some frontier?
I wont speak to her.	I will not speak with her.
Shes insistent. In fact, shes crazed. You cant help feeling sorry for her.	She is importunate, Indeed distract. Her mood will needs be pitied.
What does she want?	What would she have?
She talks about her father a lot, and says she hears there are conspiracies around the world, and coughs, and beats her breast, and gets angry over tiny matters, and talks nonsense. Her words dont mean anything, but her babbling causes her listeners to draw conclusions. They hear what they want to hear. Her winks and nods and gestures do suggest that she means to convey a message, and not a happy one.	She speaks much of her father, says she hears Theres tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart, Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing, Yet the unshaped use of it doth move The hearers to collection. They aim at it, And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts, Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them, Indeed would make one think there might be thought, Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Its a good idea to speak to her, since she might lead those with evil intentions to dangerous conclusions.	'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Show her in.	Let her come in.
	Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss. So full of artless jealousy is guilt, It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Who are the people who want to speak with me?	What are they that would speak with me?
Sailors, sir. They say they have letters for you.	Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
Show them in.	Let them come in.
	I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Hello, sir. God bless you.	God bless you, sir.
May He bless you, too.	Let him bless thee too.
He will, sir, if He wants to. Theres a letter for you, sir. Its from the ambassador, Lord Hamlet, who was going to Englandif your names Horatio, as they told me it is. (he hands HORATIO a letter)	He shall, sir, an t please Him. Theres a letter for you, sirit comes from the ambassador that was bound forEnglandif your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is. (gives HORATIO a letter)
(reading the letter) Horatio, When youve read this letter, find a way to let these guys see the king. They have letters for him. Before we were at sea for even two days, a pirate ship equipped for battle pursued us. We were too slow to escape, so we were forced to stand and fight. In the battle that followed I ended up on the pirate ship. Just then they left our ship behind, so I became the only prisoner on board. Theyve treated me quite mercifully for thieves, but they knew what they were doing. They want me to do a favor for them.	(reads) Horatio, When thou shalt have overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the king. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them. On the instant, they got clear of our ship, so I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did; I am to do a good turn for them.
Now youve got to acknowledge my innocence and believe Im your friend, since youve heard and understood that the man who killed your father was trying to kill me.	Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal, And you must put me in your heart for friend, Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, That he which hath your noble father slain Pursued my life.
It looks that way. But tell me why you didnt take immediate action against his criminal acts, when your own safety and everything else would seem to call for it.	It well appears. But tell me Why you proceeded not against these feats, So criminal and so capital in nature, As by your safety, wisdom, all things else, You mainly were stirred up.
Oh, for two main reasons which may seem weak to you, but strong to me. The queen, his mother, is devoted to him. And (for better or worse, whichever it is) she is such a part of my life and soul that I cant live apart from her, any more than a planet can leave its orbit. The other reason why I couldnt prosecute and arrest Hamlet is that the public loves him. In their affection they overlook all his faults. Like magic, they convert them into virtues, so whatever I said against him would end up hurting me, not him.	Oh, for two special reasons, Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed, But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother Lives almost by his looks, and for myself My virtue or my plague, be it either which Shes so conjunctive to my life and soul, That, as the star moves not but in his sphere, I could not but by her. The other motive Why to a public count I might not go, Is the great love the general gender bear him, Who, dipping all his faults in their affection, Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone, Convert his gyves to gracesso that my arrows, Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind, Would have reverted to my bow again, And not where I had aimed them.
Are they really going to give her a Christian burial after she killed herself?In Shakespeares time, people who committed suicide were not given a Christian burial.after she killed herself?	Is she to be buried in Christian burial when she willfullyseeks her own salvation?
Im telling you, yes. So finish that grave right away. The coroner examined her case and says it should be a Christian funeral.	I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave straight. Thecrowner hath sat on her and finds it Christian burial.
But how, unless she drowned in self-defense?	How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her owndefense?
Thats what theyre saying she did.	Why, tis found so.
Sounds more like self-offense, if you ask me. What Im saying is, if she knew she was drowning herself, then thats an act. An act has three sides to it: to do, to act, and to perform. Therefore she must have known she was drowning herself.	It must be se offendendo. It cannot be else. For here liesthe point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act. And anact hath three branchesit is to act, to do, to perform.Argal, she drowned herself wittingly.
No, listen here, gravedigger sir	Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver
Let me finish. Heres the water, right? And heres a man, okay? If the man goes into the water and drowns himself, hes the one doing it, like it or not. But if the water comes to him and drowns him, then he doesnt drown himself. Therefore, he who is innocent of his own death does not shorten his own life.	Give me leave. Here lies the water. Good. Here stands theman. Good. If the man go to this water and drown himself,it is, will he nill he, he goes. Mark you that. But if the watercome to him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal,he that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his ownlife.
Is that how the law sees it?	But is this law?
Thats enough about that. Now Ill tell you the other story about my journey. Do you remember the circumstances?	So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other. You do remember all the circumstance?
How could I forget, my lord!	Remember it, my lord?
There was a kind of war in my brain that wouldnt let me sleep. It was worse than being a captive in chains. Sometimes its good to be rashsometimes it works out well to act impulsively when our careful plans lose steam. This should show us that theres a God in heaven whos always guiding us in the right direction, however often we screw up	Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly And praised be rashness for it: let us know Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well When our deep plots do pall, and that should teach us Theres a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will
Well, of course.	That is most certain.
So I came up from my cabin with my robe tied around me, groped in the dark to find what I was looking for, found it, looked through their packet of papers, and returned to my cabin again. I was bold enough (I guess my fears made me forget my manners) to open the document containing the kings instructions. And there I found, Horatio, such royal mischiefa precisely worded order, sugared with lots of talk about Denmarks well-being and Englands too, to cut off my head, without even waiting to sharpen the ax. 	Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them, had my desire, Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again, making so bold (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal Their grand commission, where I found, Horatio O royal knavery!an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too, Withho!such bugs and goblins in my life That, on the supervise (no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the ax) My head should be struck off. 
Despite how shaken and pale with worry we are, lets take advantage of this moment of peace to catch our breath, and as we pant well speak about the battles well soon fight in foreign lands. England will no longer be wet with her own peoples blood. War will no longer damage her fields, and warhorses will no longer trample her flowers. The soldiers on either side of this vicious civil war were countrymen and brothers, as similar to one another as shooting stars. They may have clashed recently, but now they will march together in beautiful formation, no longer struggling against family and friend. War is like a mishandled knife: it can cut its owner, but it will no longer cut us. My friends, we are now soldiers for Christ, and we take his blessed cross as our battle flag. Well raise a new army of Englishmen and march all the way to the Holy Land. Our soldiers were born to chase non-believers from that holy ground touched by Jesus' feetfeet which, fourteen hundred years ago, were nailed to the cross for our sins.	So shaken as we are, so wan with care, Find we a time for frighted peace to pant And breathe short-winded accents of new broils To be commenced in strands afar remote. No more the thirsty entrance of this soil Shall daub her lips with her own childrens blood. Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields, Nor bruise her flowrets with the armed hoofs Of hostile paces. Those opposd eyes, Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven, All of one nature, of one substance bred, Did lately meet in the intestine shock And furious close of civil butchery Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks, March all one way and be no more opposed Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies. The edge of war, like an ill-sheathd knife, No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends, As far as to the sepulcher of Christ Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross We are impressd and engaged to fight Forthwith a power of English shall we levy, Whose arms were molded in their mothers' womb To chase these pagans in those holy fields Over whose acres walked those blessd feet Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed For our advantage on the bitter cross.
	And bootless tis to tell you we will go. Therefor we meet not now. Then let me hear Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland, What yesternight our council did decree In forwarding this dear expedience.
Your Highness, there was hot debate about this urgent mission, and many responsibilities had just been assigned when we were suddenly cut off by a messenger with bad news from Wales. The worst of it was that the noble Mortimer, who was leading the men of Herefordshire in battle against that barbarian Glendower, was captured. A thousand of his men have been butchered, their dead corpses desecrated by the Welsh women. The things they did were so horrible that Im too ashamed to report them.	My liege, this haste was hot in question, And many limits of the charge set down But yesternight: when all athwart there came A post from Wales loaden with heavy news, Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer, Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight Against the irregular and wild Glendower, Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken, A thousand of his people butcherd, Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse, Such beastly shameless transformation By those Welshwomen done, as may not be Without much shame retold or spoken of.
I suppose this news disrupts our plans to invade the Holy Land.	It seems then that the tidings of this broil Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
This and other things, your Highness: even more unsettling and unwelcome news has arrived from the north. On Holy Cross Day, the heroic young Harry Percywho we know as Hotspurfought at Holmeden against Archibald, Earl of Douglas, that brave and battle-proven Scotsman. The two of them fought a long and bloody battle there, judging by the way the guns were firing. The messenger who brought the news left when the battle was at its height, so he couldnt say for sure who had won.	This matched with other did, my gracious lord. For more uneven and unwelcome news Came from the north and thus it did import: On Holy-rood Day, the gallant Hotspur there, Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald, That ever valiant and approvd Scot, At Holmedon met, where they did spend A sad and bloody hour As by discharge of their artillery And shape of likelihood the news was told; For he that brought them, in the very heat And pride of their contention did take horse, Uncertain of the issue any way.
My loyal, hard-working friend Sir Walter Blunt has arrived here at court, fresh off his horse and covered with the mud of every town from Holmedon to here. Hes brought us very welcome news. The Earl of Douglas has been defeated. Blunt saw ten thousand Scotsmen and twenty-two knights piled up in their own blood on the fields of Holmedon. Hotspur took these men prisoner: Douglas' son Mordake, the Earl of Fife; as well as the Earls of Athol, Murray, Angus, and Menteith. Thats a valuable group! A fantastic catch, isnt it, kinsman?	Here is a dear, a true-industrious friend, Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse. Stained with the variation of each soil Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours, And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news. The Earl of Douglas is discomfited; Ten thousand bold Scots, two-and-twenty knights, Balked in their own blood, did Sir Walter see On Holmedons plains. Of prisoners Hotspur took Mordake, Earl of Fife, and eldest son To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Atholl, Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith. And is not this an honorable spoil? A gallant prize? Ha, cousin, is it not?
Truly, thats a conquest to make even a prince brag.	In faith, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Yes, and that makes me sad. Seeing Lord Northumberland with such a blessed son makes me commit the sin of envy. When honor speaks, it speaks about Hotspur. In a grove of trees, Hotspur stands straightest. He is the favorite darling of Fortune. When I see how he is praised, I can only see my own son, Harry, and his reputation for wildness and dishonor. If only it could be proven that a fairy had come to their cradles at night and switched them! Then the Percy family would have my Harry, and we Plantagenets would have Hotspur! But stop thinking about Harry now. Westmoreland, what do you make of young Percys arrogance? He says hell keep all the prisonersPrisoners taken in battle were supposed to be turned over to the King so that he could collect ransoms from them. Hotspurs refusal to do this breaks the usual rules and upsets King Henry.prisoners he captured for himself, and will only send me Mordrake, Earl of Fife.	Yea, there thou makst me sad, and makst me sin In envy that my Lord Northumberland Should be the father to so blest a son, A son who is the theme of Honors tongue, Amongst a grove the very straightest plant, Who is sweet Fortunes minion and her pride; Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him, See riot and dishonor stain the brow Of my young Harry. O, that it could be proved That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged In cradle-clothes our children where they lay, And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet! Then would I have his Harry, and he mine. But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz, Of this young Percys pride? The prisoners, Which he in this adventure hath surprised To his own use he keeps, and sends me word I shall have none but Mordake, Earl of Fife.
His uncle Worcester put him up to that. It is just like Worcester to act against you in all ways. Hes the one making Hotspur behave like this, flaunting his youth in the face of your dignified age.	This is his uncles teaching. This is Worcester, Malevolent to you in all aspects, Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up The crest of youth against your dignity.
Ive sent for Hotspur to explain himself. Well have to postpone the plans for our crusade to Jerusalem. Go tell my advisers that our next meeting will be Wednesday at Windsor. Then hurry back here. Theres more to be said and done, but Im too angry now to speak.	But I have sent for him to answer this. And for this cause awhile we must neglect Our holy purpose to Jerusalem. Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we Will hold at Windsor. So inform the lords. But come yourself with speed to us again, For more is to be said and to be done Than out of anger can be utterd.
I will, my lord.	I will, my liege.
Hal, what time is it, my boy?	Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?
You are so wasted from drinking booze and loosening your pants after lunch and sleeping on benches all afternoon that you dont even remember how to ask for what you really want to know. What the hell does it matter to you what time it is? Unless hours were glasses of wine, minutes were chickens, clocks were whores' tongues, sundials were whorehouse signs and the sun itself were a hot woman in a flame-colored dress, I dont see any reason why you would need to know the time.	Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack, andunbuttoning thee after supper, and sleeping upon benchesafter noon, that thou hast forgotten to demand that trulywhich thou wouldst truly know. What a devil hast thou to dowith the time of the day? Unless hours were cups of sack,and minutes capons, and clocks the tongues of bawds, anddials the signs of leaping-houses, and the blessed sunhimself a fair hot wench in flame-colored taffeta, I see noreason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand thetime of the day.
Now youre talking, Hal. Thieves like us operate at night, by the moon and stars, and not by the sun. I hope, pretty boy, that when you become king, God save your Graceor maybe I should just call you Your Majesty, since you dont have any grace	Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, for we that take pursesgo by the moon and the seven stars, and not by Phoebus,he,that wand'ring knight so fair. And I prithee, sweet wag,when thou art king, as God save thy GraceMajesty, Ishould say, for grace thou wilt have none
None?	What, none?
No, I swear. Not even enough to say grace before a snack.	No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to be prologueto an egg and butter.
Come on, out with it. Get to the point.	Well, how then? Come, roundly, roundly.
Okay then, pretty boy. Whey you become king, dont let those of us who work at night be blamed for wasting daylight by sleeping through it. Give us fancy names: Servants of the Moon Goddess Diana; Gentlemen of Shadows; Lunar Laborers. Make people admire us for being well behaved. After all, were governed by the same force that governs the tidesthe pale and cool moon, who lights our way as we sneak around.	Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not us thatare squires of the nights body be called thieves of the daysbeauty. Let us be Dianas foresters, gentlemen of the shade,minions of the moon, and let men say we be men of goodgovernment, being governed, as the sea is, by our noble andchaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance westeal.
Ive been too calm and even-tempered, unwilling to react angrily to these indignities. You have discovered this, and so youve walked all over my patience. Know this: from now on, Im going to be my royal self again, powerful and frightening. My natural condition, which was as smooth as oil and soft as feathers, has lost me the respect that powerful people only pay to the similarly powerful.	My blood hath been too cold and temperate, Unapt to stir at these indignities, And you have found me, for accordingly You tread upon my patience. But be sure I will from henceforth rather be myself, Mighty and to be feared, than my condition, Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down, And therefore lost that title of respect Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
My lord, the Percy familyWorcester, Northumberland, and Hotspur are all members of the Percy family.Percy family does not deserve to bear the brunt of your anger and power, especially since we helped you become so powerful in the first place.	Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves The scourge of greatness to be used on it, And that same greatness too which our own hands Have holp to make so portly.
Your Highness	My lord
Worcester, get out. I see danger and disobedience in your eyes. You carry yourself too boldly and proudly, and royalty should never have to endure a servants frowning face. You have my permission to leave now. When I need you or your advice, Ill call for you.	Worcester, get thee gone; for I do see Danger and disobedience in thine eye. O sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory, And majesty might never yet endure The moody frontier of a servant brow. You have good leave to leave us. When we need Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
	
Ill be damned if it isnt 4 A.M. already. The Big Dipper has already risen above the chimney, and our horses arent ready yet. Hey, ostler!ostler = horse attendant at an innostler!	Heigh-ho! An it be not four by the day, Ill be hanged.Charless Wain is over the new chimney, and yet our horsenot packed.What, ostler!
(offstage) Just a second!	(within) Anon, anon.
Hey, TomTom may be the name of either the ostler or the Second Carrier.Tom, give the saddle of my horse, Cut, a few whacks to soften it up, and stuff some wool under itthe old nags got some bad bruises on her shoulders.	I prithee, Tom, beat Cuts saddle. Put a few flocks in thepoint. Poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess.
The feed heres as damp as anything. Thats a fast way for a horse to get parasites. This stables upside down since Ostler Robin died.	Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is thenext way to give poor jades the bots. This house is turned upsidedown since Robin ostler died.
Poor guy. Once the price of oats went up, he was never happy again. It killed him.	Poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose. It wasthe death of him.
This stables got worse fleas than any in London. Im stung like a tenchA tench is a type of fish with markings that look like flea-bites.tench.	I think this be the most villanous house in all London roadfor fleas. I am stung like a tench.
Like a tench? Im telling you, not even a king could be bitten more than Ive been bitten since midnight.	Like a tench? By the Mass, there is ne'er a king christencould be better bit than I have been since the first cock.
Come on, hide, hide! I stole Falstaffs horse, and hes rubbed the wrong way; hes fraying like cheap velvet.	Come, shelter, shelter! I have removed Falstaffs horse, andhe frets like a gummed velvet.
Stay hidden.	Stand close.
Poins! Poins, damn you! Poins!	Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!
Quiet, you fat-bellied jerk! What a racket youre making!	Peace, you fat-kidneyed rascal. What a brawling dost thoukeep!
Wheres Poins, Hal?	Wheres Poins, Hal?
He walked up the hill. Ill go find him.	He is walked up to the top of the hill. Ill go seek him.
I got a raw deal, to be out robbing with him. He stole my horse and tied him up someplace. If I have to walk even four feet more, Ill be totally out of breath. Still, I bet Ill die a natural deathif I dont get hanged for killing that jerk, that is. Every hour for the past twenty-two years, Ive sworn Id never talk to him again, but I love his company. He must have slipped me a love potion that makes me adore him. Damn, that must be it: I have drunk love potions. Poins! Hal! Drop dead, the both of you! Bardolph! Peto! Ill die if I have to walk another foot. If turning honest and abandoning these jerks werent the best things I could possibly do for myself, then Im the worst scoundrel that ever lived. Eight yards of rough road is like seventy miles to me, and these hard-hearted crooks know it. It stinks when theres no honor among thieves.	I am accursed to rob in that thiefs company. The rascal hathremoved my horse and tied him I know not where. If I travelbut four foot by the square further afoot, I shall break mywind. Well, I doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, ifI scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have forsworn hiscompany hourly any time this two-and-twenty years, andyet I am bewitched with the rogues company. If the rascalhath not given me medicines to make me love him, Ill behanged. It could not be else: I have drunk medicines.Poins! Hal! A plague upon you both.Bardolph! Peto!Ill starve ere Ill rob a foot further. An twere not as gooda deed as drink to turn true man and to leave these rogues,I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth. Eightyards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles afootwith me, and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough.A plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!
As for me, sir, I would be happy to be there because of the love I bear for your family. He would be happy to be here. Well, why isnt he, then? He says he loves my family, but he clearly loves his barn more than our house. Ill read on. Your plan is dangerous. Thats true, and its also dangerous to catch a cold, to sleep, to drink. But I tell you, my lord fool, we shall pluck a flower of safety from this thorn of danger. Your plan is dangerous; your allies untrustworthy; your timing poor; and your whole project too weak to counter so powerful an opponent. Is that so? Is that so? Ill say it once again: you are a stupid, cowardly dog, and a liar. What an idiot this is! By God, our plan is as good a plan as ever hatched, our allies loyal and firm. A good plan, good allies, and very promising; its an excellent plan, very good allies. What a yellowbellied fool this is! Why, the Archbishop of York approves of the plan, and how its progressing. Damn! If I were with this imbecile right now, Id break his head open with his wifes fan. Dont we have my father? And my uncle, and me? Edmund Mortimer, York, and Owen Glendower? And besides, dont we have Douglas? Havent they all sent me letters, promising to meet me with their armies by the ninth of next month? And arent some of them on their way already? What an unbelievable ass this is! Faithless! Ha! Just watch; hell run to the King in cold fear and spill our secrets. Oh, I could split myself in two and knock my own self senseless for unfolding this important plan to such a coward. To hell with him! Let him tell the King; were ready. Ill set off tonight.	But, for mine own part, my lord, I could be well contented tobe there, in respect of the love I bear your house. He couldbe contented; why is he not, then? In respect of the love hebears our househe shows in this he loves his own barnbetter than he loves our house. Let me see some more. Thepurpose you undertake is dangerous. Why, thats certain.'Tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink; but I tell you,my lord fool, out of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower,safety. The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friendsyou have named uncertain, the time itself unsorted, and yourwhole plot too light for the counterpoise of so great anopposition. Say you so, say you so? I say unto you again, youare a shallow, cowardly hind, and you lie. What a lack-brainis this! By the Lord, our plot is a good plot as ever was laid,our friends true and constanta good plot, good friends,and full of expectation; an excellent plot, very good friends.What a frosty-spirited rogue is this! Why, my Lord of Yorkcommends the plot and the general course of the action.Zounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain him withhis ladys fan. Is there not my father, my uncle, and myself?Lord Edmund Mortimer, my Lord of York, and OwenGlendower? Is there not besides the Douglas? Have I not alltheir letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the nextmonth, and are they not some of them set forward already?What a pagan rascal is thisan infidel! Ha, you shall seenow in very sincerity of fear and cold heart, will he to theKing and lay open all our proceedings. O, I could dividemyself and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skimmilk with so honorable an action! Hang him, let him tell theKing. We are prepared. I will set forward tonight.
Ned, come out of that airless room and help me laugh a bit.	Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room and lend me thy handto laugh a little.
Whereve you been, Hal?	Where hast been, Hal?
With three or four knuckleheads and a few dozen kegs of liquor. Ive been with the lowest of the low. Sirrah, Ive made great friends with these three bartenders, and Im on a first-name basis with them: Tom, Dick, and Francis. They swear on their souls that, even though Im only the Prince of Wales, Im the king of niceness. They say Im no pompous fool, like Falstaff, but a good sport, a spirited man, a good boy. When Im King of England, all the good men of Eastcheap will follow me gladly. When you drink deeply, they joke that you have been dyed red; and if you stop for a breath when youre drinking, they yell Cough! and they command you to keep going. In fifteen minutes, I got so good at being a drinking companion, I could be at ease with any man over a drink, in any setting. Ned, you didnt do yourself any favors by missing this. But, sweet Ned, Ill sweeten the name Ned with this bit of sugar, given to me by an apprentice drawerdrawer = tapster; bartenderdrawer who never spoke any English his whole life, except, Thatll be eight shillings and sixpence, and Youre welcome, and also, Just a second, just a second! Bring a pint of bastardbastard = a kind of Spanish wine, mixed with honeybastard to the Half-MoonHalf-Moon is the name of a room at the inn.Half-Moon room! But Ned, lets pass the time until Falstaff gets here. Hide in a side room while I ask that little apprentice drawer why he gave me the sugar. Keep calling out his name, Francis, and dont stop, so that all hes able to say is, Just a second! Step aside, and Ill give you a taste.	With three or four loggerheads amongst three or fourscorehogsheads. I have sounded the very bass string of humility.Sirrah, I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers, and can callthem all by their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis.They take it already upon their salvation that though I be butPrince of Wales, yet I am the king of courtesy, and tell meflatly am no proud jack, like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a ladof mettle, a good boyby the Lord, so they call meandwhen I am King of England, I shall command all the goodlads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep dyeing scarlet,and when you breathe in your watering, they cry Hem!and bid you Play it off! To conclude, I am so good aproficient in one quarter of an hour that I can drink with anytinker in his own language during my life. I tell thee, Ned,thou hast lost much honor that thou wert not with me in thisaction; but, sweet Nedto sweeten which name of Ned, Igive thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped even now intomy hand by an underskinker, one that never spake otherEnglish in his life than Eight shillings and sixpence, andYou are welcome, with this shrill addition, Anon, anon,sir.Score a pint of bastard in the Half-moon, or so. But,Ned, to drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee, dothou stand in some by-room while I question my punydrawer to what end he gave me the sugar; and do thou neverleave calling Francis, that his tale to me may be nothingbut Anon. Step aside, and Ill show thee a precedent.
These commitments are reliable, our allies are solid, and the beginning of our project bodes well.	These promises are fair, the parties sure, And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer, and kinsman Glendower, wont you please sit? And Uncle WorcesterDammit! I forgot the map!	Lord Mortimer and cousin Glendower, Will you sit down? And Uncle Worcester A plague upon it, I have forgot the map.
Here it is. Sit, kinsman Percy. Sit, good cousin Hotspur. For that is the name King Henry calls you, and whenever he says it, he grows pale, and with a sigh he wishes you were in heaven.	No, here it is. Sit, cousin Percy Sit, good cousin Hotspur, for by that name As oft as Lancaster doth speak of you His cheek looks pale and with a rising sigh He wisheth you in heaven.
And you in hell, whenever he hears someone say Owen Glendower.	And you in hell, As oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
I dont blame him. The sky was full of fiery meteors and comets when I was conceived, and when I was born, the entire earth shook like a coward.	I cannot blame him. At my nativity The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, Of burning cressets, and at my birth The frame and huge foundation of the earth Shaked like a coward.
Why, the same thing would have happened if your mothers cat had given birth to kittens that day, whether youd been born or not.	Why, so it would have done At the same season if your mothers cat Had but kittened, though yourself had never been born.
I say there was an earthquake when I was born.	I say the earth did shake when I was born.
Gentlemen, please leave; the Prince of Wales and I must speak in private. But stay close by, for Ill need you in a moment.	Lords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and I Must have some private conference, but be near at hand, For we shall presently have need of you.
	For some displeasing service I have done, That, in his secret doom, out of my blood Hell breed revengement and a scourge for me. But thou dost in thy passages of life Make me believe that thou art only marked For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else, Could such inordinate and low desires, Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts, Such barren pleasures, rude society As thou art matched withal, and grafted to, Accompany the greatness of thy blood, And hold their level with thy princely heart?
Your majesty, I wish I could be proven innocent of all those accusations, for I can certainly clear myself of many of them. But let me beg one favor of you: if I can demonstrate that Im not guilty of the false charges of these smiling flatterers and wretched gossips (the kinds of stories that are always told about great men), then you will forgive me when I confess to the youthful indiscretions I actually did commit.	So please your Majesty, I would I could Quit all offenses with as clear excuse As well as I am doubtless I can purge Myself of many I am charged withal. Yet such extenuation let me beg As, in reproof of many tales devised, Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear, By smiling pickthanks and base newsmongers, I may for some things true, wherein my youth Hath faulty wandered and irregular, Find pardon on my true submission.
Bardolph, havent I shrivelled since our last robbery? Havent I gotten thin? Arent I shrinking? My skin is hanging off me like a loose gown on an old lady; Im puckered like a rotten apple. Id better repent my sins, and fast, while theres still something left of me. Ill be in bad shape soon, and then I wont have the strength to repent. If I havent forgotten what the inside of a church looks like, Im a withered berry, a lame old nag. The inside of a church! The wrong crowd, the wrong crowd has ruined me.	Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this last action?Do I not bate? Do I not dwindle? Why, my skin hangs aboutme like an like an old ladys loose gown. I am withered likean old applejohn. Well, Ill repent, and that suddenly, whileI am in some liking. I shall be out of heart shortly, and thenI shall have no strength to repent. An I have not forgottenwhat the inside of a church is made of, I am a peppercorn,a brewers horse. The inside of a church! Company,villanous company, hath been the spoil of me.
Sir John, you complain so much, youre sure not to live much longer.	Sir John, you are so fretful you cannot live long.
Youre absolutely right. Come on then, sing me a dirty song. Make me laugh. I lived my life as properly as a gentleman should. Well, properly enough, anyway. I didnt swear much. I didnt gamblemore than seven days a week. I went to a whorehouse no more than onceevery fifteen minutes. I paid my debtsthree or four times. I lived well and within reasonable boundaries. And now, I live poorly and out of moderation.	Why, there is it. Come sing me a bawdy song, make memerry. I was as virtuously given as a gentleman need to be,virtuous enough: swore little; diced not above seven timesa week; went to a bawdy house once in a quarterof anhour; paid money that I borrowed, three or four times; livedwell and in good compass; and now I live out of all order, outof all compass.
Youre so fat, Sir John, that you have no choice but to live out of moderation: moderation could not fit you.	Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs be out ofall compass, out of all reasonable compass, Sir John.
You fix your face and Ill fix my life. Youre like the flagship of our fleet, with a light on its bowexcept that your light is in your nose.	Do thou amend thy face, and Ill amend my life. Thou art ouradmiral, thou bearest the lantern in the poop, but tis in thenose of thee. Thou art the knight of the burning lamp.
Why, Sir John, my face isnt hurting you.	Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.
Well said, you excellent Scotsman. If people these days didnt confuse the truth with flattery, I would praise you highly. No other soldier so newly tested in battle would have gained such a widespread reputation. God knows, I dont flatter: I hate people who give out praise too easily. But you have a place in my heart that no other man has. Make me prove it; try me.	Well said, my noble Scot. If speaking truth In this fine age were not thought flattery, Such attribution should the Douglas have As not a soldier of this seasons stamp Should go so general current through the world. By God, I cannot flatter. I do defy The tongues of soothers. But a braver place In my hearts love hath no man than yourself. Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.
You are the most honorable man alive, and if any man challenges thatno matter how powerfulIll defy him.	Thou art the king of honor. No man so potent breathes upon the ground But I will beard him.
You do that. Well done.	Do so, and tis well.
	
These letters come from your father.	These letters come from your father.
Letters from him? Why isnt he here in person?	Letters from him! Why comes he not himself?
He cant come, my lord; hes terribly sick.	He cannot come, my lord. He is grievous sick.
Bardolph, go ahead of us to Coventry, and fill me a bottle of wine. Our army will keep marching, and well make it to Sutton Coldfield tonight.	Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry. Fill me a bottle ofsack. Our soldiers shall march through. Well to SuttonColdfield tonight.
Will you give me some money, captain?	Will you give me money, captain?
Spend your own.	Lay out, lay out.
If I buy you this bottle, that makes me an angelan angel = several shillings; Bardolph claims he has spent an angel on Falstaffs wine.an angel.	This bottle makes an angel.
Well, if this bottle earns you an angel, then keep it for your troubles. If you earn twenty angels, then keep them all; Im good for it. Tell my lieutenant Peto to meet me at the city limit.	An if it do, take it for thy labor. An if it make twenty, takethem all. Ill answer the coinage. Bid my lieutenant Petomeet me at towns end.
I will, captain. Farewell.	I will, captain. Farewell.
If Im not ashamed of my soldiers, then Im a pickled fish. Ive taken terrible advantage of my position. Ive pressed a hundred and fifty soldiers into service, and for that, the treasury has paid me over three hundred pounds. I recruited only well-to-do property owners and rich farmers sons. I looked for men who were engaged to be married, who were already halfway through their preparations. I found a whole supply of pampered cowards who would rather listen to the devil than a military march; who feared the sound of gunfire	If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused gurnet. Ihave misused the Kings press damnably. I have got, inexchange of a hundred and fifty soldiers, three hundred andodd pounds. I press me none but good householders,yeomens sons; inquire me out contracted bachelors, such ashad been asked twice on the banns; such a commodity ofwarm slavesas had as lief hear the devil as a drum, suchas fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck fowl or ahurt wild duck. I pressed me none but such toasts-and-butter,with hearts in their bellies no bigger than pins' heads, and
Well fight him tonight.	Well fight with him tonight.
We cant do that.	It may not be.
Then youre giving him the advantage.	You give him then advantage.
Not in the least.	Not a whit.
Why do you say that? Doesnt he have backup coming?	Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?
So do we.	So do we.
His is guaranteed. Ours isnt.	His is certain; ours is doubtful.
Nephew, Im telling you. Dont start the fighting tonight.	Good cousin, be advised. Stir not tonight.
(to HOTSPUR ) Dont, my lord.	(to HOTSPUR) Do not, my lord.
Youre giving poor advice, based on fear and cowardice.	You do not counsel well. You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
Dont slander me, Douglas. I swear on my lifeand Ill prove it with my lifethat if Im roused to fight through thoughtful, careful consideration, Im just as unafraid as you, my lord, or any Scotsman alive. In tomorrows battle, well see which one of us is afraid.	Do me no slander, Douglas. By my life (And I dare well maintain it with my life), If well-respected honor bid me on, I hold as little counsel with weak fear As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives. Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle Which of us fears.
Fine. Or tonight.	Yea, or tonight.
Hurry, Sir Michael, bring this sealed letter as fast as you can to the Lord Marshal. Bring this one to Scroop, and all the rest to whom they are addressed. If you knew how important they were, you would hurry.	Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this seald brief With winged haste to the Lord Marshal, This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest To whom they are directed. If you knew How much they do import, you would make haste.
My good lord, I can guess what they say.	My good lord, I guess their tenor.
Im sure you can. Tomorrow, Sir Michael, ten thousand men will try their luck. Im told that at Shrewsbury, the Kingwith a huge and quickly assembled armywill fight Harry Percy. Im afraid, Michael, that without Northumberland, whose army was the largest of all, and without Owen Glendower, who was also being counted on but is absent because his horoscope told him to stay away, Im afraid that Percys army will be too weak to fight the King right now.	Like enough you do. Tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men Must bide the touch. For, sir, at Shrewsbury, As I am truly given to understand, The King with mighty and quick-raisd power Meets with Lord Harry. And I fear, Sir Michael, What with the sickness of Northumberland, Whose power was in the first proportion, And what with Owen Glendowers absence thence, Who with them was a rated sinew too And comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies, I fear the power of Percy is too weak To wage an instant trial with the King.
Dont worry, sir. Douglas and Mortimer are there.	Why, my good lord, you need not fear. There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
No, Mortimer isnt there.	No, Mortimer is not there.
But Mordake is there, and Vernon, and Harry Percy, and Worcester and a slew of brave warriors and excellent men.	But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy, And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
How bloody the sun looks as it peers over that massive hill. The day looks paleit must be sick to see the sun in such a mood.	How bloodily the sun begins to peer Above yon busky hill. The day looks pale At his distemp'rature.
The southern wind is playing its trumpet, to announce to the world what the sun means. And judging by the whistling leaves, its going to be a stormy, windy day.	The southern wind Doth play the trumpet to his purposes, And by his hollow whistling in the leaves Foretells a tempest and a blust'ring day.
Then let it take the losers' side. To winners, nothing seems unpleasant.	Then with the losers let it sympathize, For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
	That you and I should meet upon such terms As now we meet. You have deceived our trust And made us doff our easy robes of peace To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel. This is not well, my lord; this is not well. What say you to it? Will you again unknit This curlish knot of all-abhorrd war And move in that obedient orb again Where you did give a fair and natural light, And be no more an exhaled meteor, A prodigy of fear and a portent Of broachd mischief to the unborn times?
Oh no, Sir Richard, my nephew cannot be told about the generous and kind offer the King made.	O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard, The liberal and kind offer of the King.
But he should be told.	'Twere best he did.
It will be the end of all of us! There is absolutely no way that the King will keep his word and trust us again. He will always be wary of us. Hell find other reasons to punish us for this rebellion. For the rest of our lives he and his loyalists will look on us with suspicion. Treason is like a fox: you can tame it, care for it, and put it in a cage, but it will always have the wild instincts it inherited from its ancestors. No matter how we looksad or happypeople will interpret our looks in the worst possible light. Well be like oxen in a stall: the better theyre fed, the closer they are to being slaughtered. My nephews disloyalty might be forgiven: his young age and hot temper will excuse it. Plus, his nickname gives him permission: Hotspur the Harebrain, always flaring up. All his offenses will be blamed on me and his father. After all, we encouraged him, and since we taught him to be angry at the King, well pay for it. So cousin, dont by any means let Harry know what the King offered.	Then are we all undone. It is not possible, it cannot be The King should keep his word in loving us. He will suspect us still and find a time To punish this offense in other faults. Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes, For treason is but trusted like the fox, Who, never so tame, so cherished and locked up, Will have a wild trick of his ancestors. Look how we can, or sad or merrily, Interpretation will misquote our looks, And we shall feed like oxen at a stall, The better cherished still the nearer death. My nephews trespass may be well forgot; It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood, And an adopted name of privilege A hairbrained Hotspur governed by a spleen: All his offenses live upon my head And on his fathers. We did train him on, And, his corruption being ta'en from us, We as the spring of all shall pay for all. Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know In any case the offer of the King.
Tell him what you want, and Ill back you up.	Deliver what you will; Ill say tis so.
What is your nameyou, who are attacking me like this? What honor do you think youll get by fighting me?	What is thy name that in the battle thus Thou crossest me? What honor dost thou seek Upon my head?
My name is Douglas, and Im haunting you in this battle because they tell me you are a king.	Know then, my name is Douglas, And I do haunt thee in the battle thus Because some tell me that thou art a king.
They tell you the truth.	They tell thee true.
Today, Lord Stafford paid for resembling you so well, for instead of you, King Harry, my sword killed him. Now it will kill you, unless you surrender as my prisoner.	The Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry, This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee, Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
I was not born to surrender, you arrogant Scotsman. Youre about to see a king take revenge for Staffords death.	I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot, And thou shalt find a king that will revenge Lord Staffords death.
Oh, Douglas! If youd fought like this at Holmedon, I would never have been able to beat you.	O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus, I never had triumphed upon a Scot.
Its over, weve won: heres the King, dead.	Alls done, alls won; here breathless lies the King.
Please, Harry, get out of here: youre bleeding too heavily. John of Lancaster, go with him.	I prithee, Harry, withdraw thyself. Thou bleedest too much. Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
I wont leave, my lord, unless I am bleeding too.	Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beg your highness, advance. Your army will lose heart if it sees you falling back.	I beseech your Majesty, make up, Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
I will. My Lord of Westmoreland, take him to his tent.	I will do so.My Lord of Westmoreland, Lead him to his tent.
(to PRINCE HENRY) Come, my lord. Ill lead you to your tent.	Come, my lord, Ill lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord? I dont need your help. God forbid that a shallow scratch could make the Prince of Wales retreat from a battlefield like this one, where great men are falling and being trampled upon, and rebels are triumphing in their massacres!	Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help, And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive The Prince of Wales from such a field as this, Where stained nobility lies trodden on, And rebels' arms triumph in massacres.
Weve stopped for too long. Come, Westmoreland. We have work to do. For Gods sake, come on!	We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmoreland, Our duty this way lies. For Gods sake, come.
By God, you have deceived me, Lancaster. I didnt think you were that brave. Before, I loved you as a brother; now, I respect you as my soulmate.	By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster. I did not think thee lord of such a spirit. Before, I loved thee as a brother, John, But now, I do respect thee as my soul.
This is how rebellions always enddefeated. Evil-spirited Worcester! Didnt I offer kindness, forgiveness and friendship to all of you? And you pretended that I did the opposite? Your relatives and friends trusted you, yet you lied to them? Three of our knights who were killed today, a noble earl, and many other men might have been alive right now if you had been a decent man and reported truthfully on the negotiations between our two armies.	Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke. Ill-spirited Worcester, did not we send grace, Pardon, and terms of love to all of you? And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary, Misuse the tenor of thy kinsmans trust? Three knights upon our party slain today, A noble earl, and many a creature else Had been alive this hour, If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
I did what I had to do for the sake of my own well-being. I accept my fate patiently, since theres no way I can avoid it.	What I have done my safety urged me to. And I embrace this fortune patiently, Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Put Worcester to death, and Vernon too: Ill wait a while before I decide what to do about the others.	Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too. Other offenders we will pause upon.
	
When that brave Scotsman, Lord Douglas, saw that things were turning against him, that Percy had been killed, and that his men were fleeing in terror, he ran away too. He fell down a hill and was so badly injured that our men were able to capture him. Hes being held prisoner at my tent. I ask your highness to let me decide what to do with him. 	The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw The fortune of the day quite turned from him, The noble Percy slain, and all his men Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest, And, falling from a hill, he was so bruised That the pursuers took him. At my tent The Douglas is, and I beseech your Grace I may dispose of him. 
Open your ears! For who could possibly block them when loud Rumor speaks? I make the wind my horse, and ride it from the Orient in the east to the place where the sun sets in the west, describing the events taking place in the world. I continually tell lies and I tell them in every language, stuffing mens ears with falsehoods. I say that things are peaceful when, in reality, concealed hatred is at work, hidden behind smiles of good will. And who but Rumorwho besides mecan make armies prepare anxious defenses, when in fact the world is uneasy for other reasons and theres no war coming at all? Rumor is like a flute. Guesswork, suspicion, and speculation are the breath that makes it sound, and its so easy to play that even the common massesthat dim monster with innumerable heads, forever clamoring and waveringcan play it. But why should I describe myself in such detail to the one group of people who knows exactly what falsehood is all about: a theater audience? Why am I here? King Henry has won the war, and at Shrewsbury, he ended the rebellion against him by defeating Hotspur and his allies, quenching the fire of revolt with the rebels' own blood. But what am I doing, telling you the truth up front? My job is to spread word that Hotspur in his fury killed Prince Hal, and that Douglas killed the King. Ive spread this rumor through all the peasant	Open your ears, for which of you will stop The vent of hearing when loud Rumor speaks? I, from the orient to the drooping west, Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold The acts commenced on this ball of earth. Upon my tongues continual slanders ride, The which in every language I pronounce, Stuffing the ears of men with false reports. I speak of peace while covert enmity Under the smile of safety wounds the world. And who but Rumor, who but only I, Make fearful musters and prepared defense, Whiles the big year, swoll'n with some other grief, Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war, And no such matter? Rumor is a pipe Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures, And of so easy and so plain a stop That the blunt monster with uncounted heads, The still-discordant wav'ring multitude, Can play upon it. But what need I thus My well-known body to anatomize Among my household? Why is Rumor here? I run before King Harrys victory, Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops, Quenching the flame of bold rebellion Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I To speak so true at first? My office is To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell
The messengers are coming hot and heavy, and every single one of them will report nothing but what hes heard from me. Straight from Rumor, they bring pretty tales of false comfort, which are far worse than truthful news of misfortune.	And that the King before the Douglas' rage Stooped his anointed head as low as death. This have I rumored through the peasant towns Between that royal field of Shrewsbury And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone, Where Hotspurs father, old Northumberland, Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on, And not a man of them brings other news Than they have learnt of me. From Rumors tongues They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs.
Hello? Whos the doorman around here?	Who keeps the gate here, ho?
	
Who shall I say you are?	What shall I say you are?
Tell the Earl that the Lord Bardolph is here to see him.	Tell thou the Earl That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.
His lordship is out walking in the orchard. If you dont mind, knock at the orchard gate and hell answer it himself.	His lordship is walked forth into the orchard. Please it your Honor knock but at the gate And he himself will answer.
Here comes the Earl.	Here comes the Earl.
Whats the news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute, new violence erupts; it is a wild time. Conflict is like a horse, fed with too much rich food: it has broken out uncontrollably, and tramples everyone who stands before it.	What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now Should be the father of some stratagem. The times are wild. Contention, like a horse Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose And bears down all before him.
SirrahSirrah = term of address for a person of lower social rankSirrah, you giantFalstaff is mocking the page for being so small.giant, what did the doctor say about my urine?	Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
He said that the urine itself was good, healthy urine, but that the man who owned it probably had more diseases than he could tell.	He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water, but, for the party that owed it, he might have more diseases than he knew for.
All kinds of people make it a matter of pride to heckle me. No manthat foolishly assembled lump of claycould ever invent something quite as funny as I seem to be to other people. Im not only witty on my own, but I bring out wit in other people. Look at the two of us, walking here: I look like a sow thats smothered all of her baby pigs, except for you. If the Prince sent you to serve me for any other reason than to irritate me, Im a fool. You weedy little son of a bitch: youre so tiny that you should be a decoration on my hat, not a servant at my feet. Ive never had a servant before who was as tiny as a ring stone. But I wont set you in a gold or silver ring; Ill wrap you in rags and send you back to your master, to be used as a jewelthat youth, the Prince your master, whose chin is still lacking a beard. Why, Ill grow a beard in the palm of my hand before hell have one that he can shave off his face. And yet, this doesnt stop him from claiming that he has a face for royaltyFalstaff puns on the fact that a royal was a kind of coin, stamped with the kings face.royalty. Well, God will give him a beard whenever he chooses totheres not a hair out of place yet. Its a good thing the Princes face is a royal, because a barber will never earn a coin from shaving it. And still, the	Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me. The brain of this foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent anything that tends to laughter more than I invent, or is invented on me. I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men. I do here walk before thee like a sow that hath overwhelmed all her litter but one. If the Prince put thee into my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then I have no judgment. Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. I was never manned with an agate till now, but I will inset you neither in gold nor silver, but in vile apparel, and send you back again to your master for a jewel. The juvenal, the Prince your master, whose chin is not yet fledgeI will sooner have a beard grow in the palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek, and yet he will not stick to say his face is a face royal. God may finish it when He will. 'Tis not a hair amiss yet. He may keep it still at a face royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it, and yet hell be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace, but hes almost out of
So thats what were fighting for, and thats the kind of support we have. Now please, my noble friends, tell me frankly if you think we have a chance. First you, Marshal Mowbray. What do you say?	Thus have you heard our cause and known our means, And, my most noble friends, I pray you all Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes. And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?
I absolutely agree with our reasons for fighting. But given our resources, Id feel better if I knew how were going to grow bold and strong enough to defeat this mighty and powerful King.	I well allow the occasion of our arms, But gladly would be better satisfied How in our means we should advance ourselves To look with forehead bold and big enough Upon the power and puissance of the King.
Our army has grown to twenty-five thousand good men. Our reinforcements are coming with Northumberland, and his heart burns with anger over all hes lost.	Our present musters grow upon the file To five-and-twenty thousand men of choice, And our supplies live largely in the hope Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns With an incensd fire of injuries.
Then, Lord Hastings, this is the question: can our twenty-five thousand get the job done without Northumberland?	The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus: Whether our present five-and-twenty thousand May hold up head without Northumberland.
With him, we can.	With him we may.
Yes, exactly, and thats the point. If were too weak without him, then I dont think we should advance until we know that his help is guaranteed. In a fight as bloody as this one, we need to be certain about the status of our supporters: we cant rely on conjecture, hope, and guesswork when aid isnt guaranteed.	Yea, marry, theres the point. But if without him we be thought too feeble, My judgment is we should not step too far Till we had his assistance by the hand. For in a theme so bloody-faced as this, Conjecture, expectation, and surmise Of aids incertain should not be admitted.
Master Fang, have you filed the lawsuit?	Master Fang, have you entered the action?
Its filed.	It is entered.
Wheres your deputy? Is he a strong deputy? Will he rise to the occasion?	Wheres your yeoman? Is t a lusty yeoman? Will a' stand to t?
Sirrah, wheres Snare?	Sirrah! Wheres Snare?
Oh my goodness! Master Snare!	O Lord, ay, good Master Snare.
Here, here.	Here, here.
Snare, weve got to arrest Sir John Falstaff.	Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.
Yes, good Master Snare. Ive filed the suit against him and everything.	Yea, good Master Snare, I have entered him and all.
It could cost some of us our lives: hell stab.	It may chance cost some of us our lives, for he will stab.
Oh my goodness! Watch out for him: he stabbed me in my own house, and it was nasty. I swear, he doesnt care what trouble he causes. Once hes got his weapon out, hell thrust it like the devil. He wont spare man, woman, or child.	Alas the day, take heed of him. He stabbed me in mine own house, and that most beastly, in good faith. He cares not what mischief he does. If his weapon be out, he will foin like any devil. He will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
If I can get close to him, I wont worry about his thrusting.	If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.
I swear to God, Im exceedingly tired.	Before God, I am exceeding weary.
Really? I would have thought that weariness wouldnt dare afflict someone as highly born as you.	Is t come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have attached one of so high blood.
Well, it afflicts me, although saying so dims my nobility somewhat. Does it make me seem coarse and common to say that Id love a small beersmall beer = a kind of weak, thin beersmall beer?	Faith, it does me; though it discolors the complexion of my greatness to acknowledge it. Doth it not show vilely in me to desire small beer?
A prince shouldnt be vulgarly inclined toward things like small beer.	Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to remember so weak a composition.
Then I suppose dont have a princes appetite, because right now all I can think about is small beer. But its true: all these everyday considerations distance me from my own nobility. Its disgraceful that I should be familiar with a man like you! To know your name, your face, and your wardrobe so intimately that I know that you have two pairs of stockings: the ones youre wearing now, and those peach-colored ones. I even know how many shirts you have: one to wear, and one extra. But then, the keeper of the tennis courts knows your wardrobe better than I do, for when youve run out of clean shirts, you dont show up to play. And you havent played in a while, because the whore houses have eaten all the rest of your money, which youd otherwise use to buy more shirts. God only knows whether all the crying brats youve fathered will make it to heaven. But then, the midwives say that babies dont bear the sins of the parents. Thats how the population increases, and families are strengthened.	Belike then my appetite was not princely got, for, by my troth, I do now remember the poor creature small beer. But indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name, or to know thy face tomorrow, or to take note how many pair of silk stockings thou hastwith these, and those that were thy peach-colored onesor to bear the inventory of thy shirts, as, one for superfluity and another for use. But that the tennis-court keeper knows better than I, for it is a low ebb of linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, because the rest of the low countries have made a shift to eat up thy holland; and God knows whether those that bawl out the ruins of thy linen shall inherit His kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault, whereupon the world increases and kindreds are mightily strengthened.
Please, my loving wife and sweet daughter-in-law, support me in my difficult tasks. Dont let the grimness of these days be reflected in your faces; dont add to Percys troubles.	I pray thee, loving wife and gentle daughter, Give even way unto my rough affairs. Put not you on the visage of the times And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.
I give up; I wont say any more. Do what you want. Let your wisdom guide you.	I have given over. I will speak no more. Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.
For goodness sake, sweet wife, my honor is at stake. Nothing can redeem it except my going.	Alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn, And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.
For Gods sake, dont go to these wars! Father-in-law, you once broke your word when you had better reason to keep it than you do now. Your own son Percymy hearts beloved Harrylooked northward again and again, hoping to see his father coming with an army. But he hoped in vain. Who persuaded you to stay home that time? Two honors were lost in that battle: yours, and your sons. As for yours, I hope God will make it shine again. As for Harrys honor, it clung to him like the sun in a pale blue sky, and by its light every knight in England was moved to act bravely. He was the mirror in which noble youths dressed themselves. All men copied his way of walking, except those who had no legs. And talking loudly and quicklythe one flaw nature had given himbecame the speech pattern for all brave men. Those who spoke softly and slowly would corrupt their proper speech, just to seem more like	O yet, for Gods sake, go not to these wars. The time was, father, that you broke your word, When you were more endeared to it than now, When your own Percy, when my hearts dear Harry, Threw many a northward look to see his father Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain. Who then persuaded you to stay at home? There were two honors lost, yours and your sons. For yours, the God of heaven brighten it. For his, it stuck upon him as the sun In the gray vault of heaven, and by his light Did all the chivalry of England move To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves. He had no legs that practiced not his gait; And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish, Became the accents of the valiant; For those that could speak low and tardily Would turn their own perfection to abuse
What the hell have you got there? Apple johnsapple johns = a variety of apple, eaten once the fruit is shriveledApple johns? You know Sir John cant stand apple johns.	What the devil hast thou brought thereapplejohns? Thou knowest Sir John cannot endure an applejohn.
Damn, youre right. One day the Prince put a plate of apple-johns in front of Falstaff and said, Here are five more Sir Johns. Then the Prince took off his hat and said, Im now going to bid farewell to these six dry, round, old, withered knights. It angered Sir John deeply, but he got over it.	Mass, thou sayest true. The Prince once set a dish of applejohns before him and told him there were five more Sir Johns and, putting off his hat, said I will now take my leave of these six dry, round, old, withered knights. It angered him to the heart. But he hath forgot that.
Well then, put the table cloth on and set the dish down. Go see if you can find Sneaks band of musicians. Mistress Tearsheet wants to hear some music.	Why then, cover, and set them down, and see if thou canst find out Sneaks noise. Mistress Tearsheet would fain hear some music.
Hurry! The room they ate in was too hot, and theyll be here any minute.	Dispatch: the room where they supped is too hot. Theyll come in straight.
Sirrah, the Prince and Poins will be here soon. Theyre going to put on a couple of our jackets and aprons. Sir John cant know its them. Bardolph came and told me.	Sirrah, here will be the Prince and Master Poins anon, and they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons, and Sir John must not know of it. Bardolph hath brought word.
Well, theres going to be hilarity here! What a great scheme!	By the Mass, here will be old utis. It will be an excellent stratagem.
Ill see if I can find Sneak.	Ill see if I can find out Sneak.
Call the earls of Surrey and Warwick. Tell them to read over these letters before they come, and to think carefully about them. Hurry.	Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick; But, ere they come, bid them o'erread these letters And well consider of them. Make good speed.
Will you even close the eyes of a ship boy, high up on the whirling mast, and rock him gently in a cradle made of rough, tossing seas and howling windswinds which take the waves and, curling them over, crashes them through the air with such a deafening noise that they wake death itself? Can you, oh unfair sleep, give rest to a drenched little sailor in the midst of such roughness, and yet deny it to a king?	Are at this hour asleep! O sleep, O gentle sleep, Natures soft nurse, how have I frighted thee, That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down And steep my senses in forgetfulness? Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs, Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber, Than in the perfumed chambers of the great, Under the canopies of costly state, And lulld with sound of sweetest melody? O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile In loathsome beds and leavest the kingly couch A watch-case or a common 'larum bell? Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast Seal up the shipboys eyes, and rock his brains In cradle of the rude imperious surge And in the visitation of the winds, Who take the ruffian billows by the top, Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them With deafening clamor in the slippery clouds That with the hurly death itself awakes? Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,
Come on, come on, come on, sir. Shake my hand, sir, shake my hand. Youre an early riser, I swear. How are you, cousin Silence?	Come on, come on, come on. Give me your hand, sir, give me your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by the rood. And how doth my good cousin Silence?
Good morning, cousin Shallow.	Good morrow, good cousin Shallow.
And hows my cousin, your wife? And your prettiest daughter, my fair god-daughter Ellen?	And how doth my cousin your bedfellow? And your fairest daughter and mine, my goddaughter Ellen?
Im afraid shes got dark hairDark hair was considered unattractive.dark hair, cousin Shallow!	Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow.
By gum, I bet Williams become a real scholar. Hes still at Oxford, right?	By yea and no, sir. I dare say my cousin William is become a good scholar. He is at Oxford still, is he not?
He sure is, and Im the one whos paying for it.	Indeed, sir, to my cost.
Hell be going to law school soon. I studied law at Clements InnThe Inns of Court are London legal colleges.Clements Inn, where I think they still talk about crazy old Shallow.	He must then to the Inns o' Court shortly. I was once of Clements Inn, where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.
You were known as lusty Shallow back then, cousin.	You were called Lusty Shallow then, cousin.
I was known as anything, I swear. And I would have done anything too, and all the way, too. I was there, and little John Doit from Staffordshire, and black-haired George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone, and Will Squele, from the Cotswolds. Since then, no law college	By the Mass, I was called anything, and I would have done anything indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little John Doit of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone, and Will Squele, a Cotswold man. You had not four such swinge-bucklers in all the Inns o' Court
Whats the name of this forest?	What is this forest called?
Gaultree Forest, your grace.	'Tis Gaultree Forest, an t shall please your Grace.
Stop here, sirs. Send out scouts to find out how many soldiers our enemy has.	Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth To know the numbers of our enemies.
Weve already done that.	We have sent forth already.
Well done. My friends and brothers in this great undertaking, I have to share with you that Ive received new letters from Northumberland. They have a chilling purpose, tone, and content. He says that he wishes he could be here in person, with an army as strong someone of his rank should have, but he couldnt raise one. So hes going to go to Scotland to increase his power. He prays that your armies will prevail against the terrible power of the enemy.	'Tis well done. My friends and brethren in these great affairs, I must acquaint you that I have received New-dated letters from Northumberland, Their cold intent, tenor, and substance, thus: Here doth he wish his person, with such powers As might hold sortance with his quality, The which he could not levy; whereupon He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes, To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers That your attempts may overlive the hazard And fearful melting of their opposite.
And with that, any hope we had for him is thrown to the ground and dashed to pieces.	Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground And dash themselves to pieces.
Whats your name, sir? Whats your rank, and where are you from?	Whats your name, sir? Of what condition are you, and of what place, I pray?
I am a knight, sir. My name is Coleville of the Valley.	I am a knight, sir, and my name is Colevile of the Dale.
Well, then, Coleville is your name, your rank is knight, and the valley is where youre from. Coleville will still be your name now that traitor is your rank, and the dungeon is where youll be. Its a place so deep that youll still be in a kind of valley.	Well, then, Colevile is your name, a knight is your degree, and your place the Dale. Colevile shall be still your name, a traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place, a place deep enough so shall you be still Colevile of the Dale.
Arent you Sir John Falstaff?	Are not you Sir John Falstaff?
Im as good a man as Falstaff, whoever I am. Will you surrender? Or am I going to have to break a sweat making you surrender? If I sweat, the drops will be the tears of your loved ones, weeping over your death. So youd better get scared and start to shake, and start praying to me for mercy.	As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am. Do ye yield, sir, or shall I sweat for you? If I do sweat, they are the drops of thy lovers and they weep for thy death. Therefore rouse up fear and trembling, and do observance to my mercy.
I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and so I surrender.	I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that thought yield me.
My enormous belly can speak in many languages, and each language proclaims my name and my name alone. If I had a moderately sized belly, all Id be is an anonymous but very successful soldier. But my belly, my belly, my belly blows my cover. Here comes the general.	I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name. An I had but a belly of any indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes me. Here comes our general.
Now, my lords: if God grants us a victory in this violent civil war that bleeds at our very doorsteps, I will lead our young people in a greater cause, and fight nothing but holy wars. Our navy is ready, our army is assembled, the leaders who are my subordinates have their orders, and everything is standing by to achieve my main aim. The only drawback is that Im feeling a little weak. So lets wait a short while, until the rebels, now on the run, are brought back in line and are made obedient again.	Now, lords, if God doth give successful end To this debate that bleedeth at our doors, We will our youth lead on to higher fields And draw no swords but what are sanctified. Our navy is addressed, our power collected, Our substitutes in absence well invested, And everything lies level to our wish. Only we want a little personal strength; And pause us till these rebels now afoot Come underneath the yoke of government.
We are sure that youll soon enjoy both good health and the rebels' defeat.	Both which we doubt not but your Majesty Shall soon enjoy.
My son Humphrey of Gloucester, where is your brother, Prince Hal?	Humphrey, my son of Gloucester, Where is the Prince your brother?
I think hes gone hunting at Windsor.	I think hes gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.
Whos with him?	And how accompanied?
I dont know, father.	I do not know, my lord.
Isnt his brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?	Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?
No, father. Hes here.	No, my good lord, he is in presence here.
What is it youd like, father?	What would my lord and father?
By gum, sir, you will not leave tonight. Hey, Davy!	By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away tonight.What, Davy, I say!
Please excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.	You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.
I will not excuse you. You will not be excused. Excuses will not be allowed. No excuse will do. You will not be excused. Hey, Davy!	I will not excuse you. You shall not be excused. Excuses shall not be admitted. There is no excuse shall serve. You shall not be excused.Why, Davy!
Here, sir.	Here, sir.
Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, lets see, Davy, lets see, Davy, lets see. Oh yes, right: tell William the cook to come here. Sir John, you will not be excused.	Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see. Yea, marry, William cook, bid him come hither.Sir John, you shall not be excused.
Well sir, heres the thing. Those warrants couldnt be served. And once more, sir, should we plant wheat at the fields edges?	Marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served. And again, sir, shall we sow the hade land with wheat?
Plant red wheat, Davy. But as for William the cookarent there any young pigeons?	With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook, are there no young pigeons?
Yes, sir. Heres the bill from the blacksmith for horseshoes and plow blades.	Yes, sir. Here is now the smiths note for shoeing and plow irons.
Whats happening, my Lord Chief Justice? Where are you going?	How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?
Hows the King doing?	How doth the King?
Very well. All his worries are ended now.	Exceeding well. His cares are now all ended.
Not dead, I hope.	I hope, not dead.
Hes gone down natures path; for our purposes, he is no longer living.	Hes walked the way of nature, And to our purposes he lives no more.
I wish his majesty had brought me with him. The work I did for him while he was alive makes me very vulnerable, now that hes dead.	I would his Majesty had called me with him. The service that I truly did his life Hath left me open to all injuries.
Indeed, I think the young King has no love for you.	Indeed, I think the young King loves you not.
I know he doesnt. Im preparing myself to deal with whatever happens, which cant be any worse than what Ive imagined.	I know he doth not, and do arm myself To welcome the condition of the time, Which cannot look more hideously upon me Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.
Here come the heavy-hearted children of dead Harry. If only the living Harry had the character of the worst of these three young men. Then a lot of noblemen would remain secure, instead of having to step aside to make room for lowlifes.	Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry. O, that the living Harry had the temper Of he the worst of these three gentlemen! How many nobles then should hold their places That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!
No, youre going to see my orchard. Well sit in an arbor and eat some of the pippin apples I cross-bred last season, along with some caraway seeds and so on. Come on, Silence. Then well go to bed.	Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbor, we will eat a last years pippin of my own graffing, with a dish of caraways, and so forth.Come, cousin Silence.And then to bed.
I swear, you have a good-looking place here, and its fancy.	Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling and a rich.
Cheap, cheap, cheap. Were broke, broke, Sir John. But one thing we do have is good air. Set the table, Davy, set the table. Good job, Davy.	Barren, barren, barren, beggars all, beggars all, Sir John. Marry, good air.Spread, Davy, spread, Davy. Well said, Davy.
This Davy does a lot for you. Hes your right-hand man as well as your steward.	This Davy serves you for good uses. He is your servingman and your husband.
A good servant, a very good servant, Sir John. By God, I had too much wine with dinner. A good servant. Now sit down, sit down. Come on, cousin.	A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, Sir John. By the Mass, I have drunk too much sack at supper. A good varlet. Now sit down, now sit down.Come, cousin.
Ah, Sirrah, he said. We will: Do nothing but eat and celebrate, (sings) And praise God for this happy year, When flesh is cheap but women are costly, And lusty men roam here and there, So merrily, And always so merrily.	Ah, sirrah, quoth he, we shall Do nothing but eat and make good cheer, (sings) And praise God for the merry year, When flesh is cheap and females dear, And lusty lads roam here and there So merrily, And ever among so merrily.
Thats a merry heart! Master Silence, Ill drink a toast to you in a minute.	Theres a merry heart!Good Master Silence, Ill give you a health for that anon.
No, you horrible rogue! I wish to God I were dead, so I could have you hanged. You dislocated my shoulder!	No, thou arrant knave. I would to God that I might die, that I might have thee hanged. Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.
The street cops handed her over to me, and shell be whipped through and through, I promise. Shes been involved in a couple of murders.	The Constables have delivered her over to me, and she shall have whipping cheer enough, I warrant her. There hath been a man or two lately killed about her.
Pig, Pig! You lie! Come on! Ill tell you what, you damned flabby-faced moron: if I have a miscarriage now, youll wish youd hit your own mother, you pasty-faced villain!	Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie! Come on, I ll tell thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal: an the child I now go with do miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou paper-faced villain.
Oh God, I wish Sir John would come! Hed make somebody bleed for this. I pray to God that she has a miscarriage!	O the Lord, that Sir John were come! I would make this a bloody day to somebody. But I pray God the fruit of her womb might miscarry.
Well, if she does, youll have twelve cushions on your couch again. You have only eleven now, since shes wearing one of them under her dress. I order both of you to come with me: the man that you two and Pistol beat up is dead.	If it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again; you have but eleven now. Come, I charge you both go with me, for the man is dead that you and Pistol beat amongst you.
Ill tell you what, you stick-figure; Ill have you beaten soundly for this. You blue-coated rogue, you filthy, starving correctioner! If you arent walloped for this, Ill swear off skirts.	Ill tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will have you as soundly swinged for this, you bluebottle rogue, you filthy famished correctioner. If you be not swinged, Ill forswear half-kirtles.
Come on, come on, you little night sinner, come on.	Come, come, you she knight-errant, come.
More rushes; more rushes.	More rushes, more rushes.
The trumpets have blown twice.	The trumpets have sounded twice.
Itll be two o'clock before they arrive from the coronation. Hurry, hurry.	'Twill be two o'clock ere they come from the coronation. Dispatch, dispatch.
Stand here near me, Master Robert Shallow. Ill make the King do good things for you: Ill throw him a look as he passes by. Just watch the face hell make at me.	Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow. I will make the King do you grace. I will leer upon him as he comes by, and do but mark the countenance that he will give me.
God bless your lungs, good knight.	God bless thy lungs, good knight!
Come here, Pistol. Stand behind me. (to SHALLOW) Oh, if Id had time to make new clothes I would have spent the thousand pounds I borrowed from you. But it doesnt matter. These poor clothes are better; it shows how desperate I was to see him.	Come here, Pistol, stand behind me.(to SHALLOW) O, if I had had time to have made new liveries, I would have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you. But tis no matter. This poor show doth better. This doth infer the zeal I had to see him.
It does indeed.	It doth so.
It shows how sincerely I love him	It shows my earnestness of affection
It does indeed.	It doth so.
My devotion 	My devotion 
If only we had divine inspiration, our play might rise to the highest level of imagination. If we had a stage as big as a kingdom, real kings and queens to act the part of kings and queens, and royalty to also witness the glorious spectacle, then it would be as it really was. Then valiant King Harry would resemble the god of war, as he did in life, and famine, sword, and fire would sit like dogs at his feet, waiting to be unleashed. But, ladies and gentlemen, since thats not the case, you must forgive us plain, ordinary men who dare to act out so great a story on this humble stage. Can this theater seem to contain the sweeping fields of France? Could we even squeeze into this little theater the helmets that looked so frightening at Agincourt? Hardly! But, pardon us, because just as a few strokes of a pen, a few zeros, can signify a huge number, we, who are zeros in this great story, can work on your imagination. Pretend that within the confines of this theater sit two great kingdoms divided by a narrow but perilous ocean. Let your thoughts make up for our imperfections. Divide each man into a thousand, and there you will have an imaginary army. Imagine, when we talk of horses, that you see them planting their proud hooves in the soft earth. Because now it is your thoughts that must dress up our kings and transport them from place to place. Your thoughts must leap over huge spans of time, turning the events of many	Oh, for a muse of fire that would ascend The brightest heaven of invention! A kingdom for a stage, princes to act, And monarchs to behold the swelling scene! Then should the warlike Harry, like himself, Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels, Leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all, The flat unraisd spirits that hath dared On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth So great an object. Can this cockpit hold The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram Within this wooden O the very casques That did affright the air at Agincourt? O pardon, since a crookd figure may Attest in little place a million, And let us, ciphers to this great account, On your imaginary forces work. Suppose within the girdle of these walls Are now confined two mighty monarchies Whose high upreard and abutting fronts The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder. Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts. Into a thousand parts divide one man, And make imaginary puissance. Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth, For tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings, Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
	Into an hour-glass; for the which supply, Admit me chorus to this history; Who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray Gently to hear, kindly to judge our play.
My lord, this bill thats being proposed is the same one that was proposed in the eleventh year of old King Henrys reign. Everyone thought it would pass then, and it probably would have had it not been for the great civil unrest and uncertainty of the time, which required the matter to be put off.	My lord, Ill tell you that self bill is urged Which in th' eleventh year of the last kings reign Was like, and had indeed against us passed But that the scambling and unquiet time Did push it out of farther question.
But how will we keep it from being passed now, my lord?	But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
We have to think about that. If it does pass, the Church will lose more than half of what it possesses, because the bill would strip us of enough real estate left to the church by wealthy, pious men in their wills to support fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, six thousand two hundred squires, and a hundred well-supplied almshouses for the relief of lepers, old-age pensioners, the poor, and those too weak or sick to work. Add to that a yearly sum of a thousand pounds to go directly into the kings coffers. Thats what the bill says.	It must be thought on. If it pass against us, We lose the better half of our possession, For all the temporal lands which men devout By testament have given to the Church Would they strip from us, being valued thus: As much as would maintain, to the Kings honor, Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, Six thousand and two hundred good esquires; And, to relief of lazars and weak age Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil, A hundred almshouses right well supplied; And to the coffers of the King besides, A thousand pounds by th' year. Thus runs the bill.
That would be quite a drain.	This would drink deep.
It would drain us dry.	'Twould drink the cup and all.
But what can be done to prevent it?	But what prevention?
The king is virtuous and kind.	The king is full of grace and fair regard.
And a true lover of the holy Church.	And a true lover of the holy Church.
Where is my gracious lord of Canterbury?	Where is my gracious lord of Canterbury?
Hes not here.	Not here in presence.
Send for him, dear uncle.	Send for him, good uncle.
Shall we call in the ambassador, my liege?	Shall we call in th' ambassador, my liege?
Not yet, cousin. Before I hear him, I want to decide some important issues that are on my mind concerning my throne and France.	Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved, Before we hear him, of some things of weight That task our thoughts concerning us and France.
May God and his angels guard your sacred throne and grant that you dignify it for a long time.	God and his angels guard your sacred throne And make you long become it.
Thank you, Im sure. My learned lord, kindly explain to us the legal and religious grounds for why this French Salic law either should or shouldnt bar me in my claim. And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord, that you should invent, twist, or distort your interpretation, or burden your conscience by subtly arguing for false claims. For God knows how many healthy men will shed their blood in support of whatever you persuade me to do. So think carefully before you incite me	Sure we thank you. My learnd lord, we pray you to proceed And justly and religiously unfold Why the law Salic that they have in France Or should or should not bar us in our claim. And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord, That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading, Or nicely charge your understanding soul With opening titles miscreate, whose right Suits not in native colors with the truth; For God doth know how many now in health Shall drop their blood in approbation
Now all the young men of England are inspired and have stored their party clothes in the closet. Armorers are doing great business, and all men think about is honor. People are selling off their land to buy warhorses so they can follow the exemplary king into battle as if they had winged feet, like MercuryIn Roman mythology, Mercury is the messenger of the gods, often de picted with winged feet.Mercury. Theres a sense of anticipation in the air. In the minds of Harry and his followers, visions of the kingdoms, spoils, and titles to be won eclipse thoughts of actual fighting. The French, meanwhile, have been forewarned of all this preparation by their spies and tremble in fear. They seek to derail the English with cowardly tricks. Oh, England! You are physically small but inwardly great, like a mighty heart enclosed in a small body. There is nothing you couldnt accomplish if all your subjects were loyal and loving! But, see, the king of France has detected your weak spot: a nest of faithless traitors, whose treachery he has purchased with gold. Three corrupt menRichard, earl of Cambridge; Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham; and Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberlandhave agreed to conspire with the French in exchange for money. The gracious king will die by their hands in Southampton before he sets sail for Franceif Hell and treason have their way. Stick with us, ladies and gentlemen, and well make a play, conquering space and time. Imagine that the traitors have been paid and made their choice. The king has left London, and the scene now	Now all the youth of England are on fire, And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. Now thrive the armorers, and honors thought Reigns solely in the breast of every man. They sell the pasture now to buy the horse, Following the mirror of all Christian kings With wingd heels, as English Mercurys. For now sits Expectation in the air And hides a sword, from hilts unto the point, With crowns imperial, crowns and coronets Promised to Harry and his followers. The French, advised by good intelligence Of this most dreadful preparation, Shake in their fear, and with pale policy Seek to divert the English purposes. O England, model to thy inward greatness, Like little body with a mighty heart, What mightst thou do, that honor would thee do, Were all thy children kind and natural! But see, thy fault France hath in thee found out, A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills With treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men One, Richard, Earl of Cambridge, and the second, Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third, Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland Have, for the gilt of France (Oh, guilt indeed!), Confirmed conspiracy with fearful France, And by their hands this grace of kings must die, If hell and treason hold their promises,
Good to see you, Corporal Nym.	Well met, Corporal Nym.
Good day, Lieutenant Bardolph.	Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.
Tell me, are you and Ensign Pistol friends again yet?	What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?
For my part, I really dont care. I dont say much, but when the time comes, well smile at each other. But thats as it may be. I wont fight, but I can close my eyes and take a swipe with my swordjust a simple sword, but so what? Its good enough to toast cheese, and it will survive cold as well as another mans sword. And thats that.	For my part, I care not. I say little, but when time shallserve, there shall be smiles; but that shall be as it may. I darenot fight, but I will wink and hold out mine iron. It is asimple one, but what though? It will toast cheese, and it willendure cold as another mans sword will, and theres an end.
Ill buy you both breakfast if it will make you two friends. Then we can all three be comrades on our way to France. How about it, Corporal Nym?	I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and well beall three sworn brothers to France. Let t be so, goodCorporal Nym.
Well, I will live until I die, thats for sure, and when I cant live anymore, Ill deal with it. Thats it. Thats really all I can say.	Faith, I will live so long as I may, thats the certain of it. Andwhen I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may. That is myrest; that is the rendezvous of it.
Its true, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly. And its true that she did you wrong, since you were engaged to her.	It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly,and certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plightto her.
Its not for me to say. Things are what they are. Men may sleep, and when they do they may have their throats with them, and some people say knives have blades. What must be must be, and though my patience is worn out, it will last a little longer. There must be some resolution. Well, its not for me to say.	I cannot tell. Things must be as they may. Men may sleep,and they may have their throats about them at that time,and some say knives have edges. It must be as it may.Though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod. Theremust be conclusions. Well, I cannot tell.
I must say, the king is taking a bold risk letting these traitors go free.	'Fore God, his grace is bold to trust these traitors.
Theyll be arrested in a little while.	They shall be apprehended by and by.
How smooth and cool they seem! Just as if they were perfectly loyal and faithful.	How smooth and even they do bear themselves, As if allegiance in their bosoms sat Crownd with faith and constant loyalty.
The king has been informed of all their plans, but they have no idea.	The king hath note of all that they intend, By interception which they dream not of.
No, but its unbelievable that the man who was his dearest friend, a man he has showered with love and favor, would repay the king with treachery, selling his own sovereigns life to a foreign power!	Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow, Whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious favors That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell His sovereigns life to death and treachery!
Now that the wind is favorable, lets board the ship. My Lord of Cambridge and my good Lord of Masham and you, my noble knight, what do you think? Will our army cut a swath through the fighting force of France, achieving and accomplishing everything Ive assembled them to do?	Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard. My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham, And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts. Think you not that the powers we bear with us Will cut their passage through the force of France, Doing the execution and the act For which we have in head assembled them?
No doubt it will, my liege, if each man does his best.	No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.
Please, sweet husband, let me come with you as far as the town of Staines.	Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.
No, because my manly heart is grieving. Bardolph, be happy.Nym, rouse your bragging spirits.Boy, be brave. Falstaff is dead, and we must mourn him.	No; for my manly heart doth earn.Bardolph, be blithe.Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins.Boy, bristle thy courageup. For Falstaff, he is dead, and we must earn therefore.
I wish I were with him, wherever he isin heaven or in hell.	Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either inheaven or in hell.
Oh, no, hes surely not in hell. Hes in Arthurs bosomThe hostess means Abrahams bosom, the proverbial resting place of good Christians, but has King Arthur on the brain.Arthurs bosom, if any man ever went to Arthurs bosom. He died as peacefully as a baby. He departed right between twelve and one, just as the tide was turning. For after I saw him fumbling with the sheets and playing with imaginary flowers and smiling at the ends of his fingers, I knew it was the end. His face was gaunt and he was babbling about green fields. Now, now, Sir John! I said. Whats all this? Cheer up! And he called out God, God, God! three or four times. To soothe him, I told him not to think of God, that I hoped it wasnt yet time to bother with such thoughts. So he asked me to put more blankets on his feet. I put my hand into the bed and felt his feet, and they were stone-cold. Then I felt his legs, and they were stone-cold, and so I moved upward and upward, and his whole body was stone-cold.	Nay, sure, hes not in hell! Hes in Arthurs bosom, if everman went to Arthurs bosom. He made a finer end, andwent away an it had been any christom child. He partedev'n just between twelve and one, ev'n at the turning o' th'tide; for after I saw him fumble with the sheets and playwith flowers and smile upon his fingers end, I knew therewas but one way, for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and hetold of green fields. How now, Sir John? quoth I. What,man, be o' good cheer! So he cried out God, God, God!three or four times. Now I, to comfort him, bid him heshould not think of God. I hoped there was no need totrouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So he bade melay more clothes on his feet. I put my hand into the bed andfelt them, and they were as cold as any stone. Then I felt tohis knees, and so upward and upward, and all was as cold asany stone.
They say he cried out against sherry.	They say he cried out of sack.
Yes, he did.	Ay, that he did.
And so, on the wings of imagination and at the speed of thought, our scene flies swiftly on. Imagine that you have seen the well-equipped king at Dover pier set sail in full royal regalia and his noble fleet fan the rising sun with its silken banners. Give your imagination free rein. Picture the cabin boys climbing around the rigging. Hear the shrill whistle that brings order to the hubbub. Picture the linen sails driven by the invisible and subtle wind as they pull the vast hulls through the wrinkled sea, breasting the high waves. Pretend that youre standing on the shore, watching a city dance on the shifting waves, and youll have an idea of the look of this majestic fleet as it holds a straight course for Harfleur. Follow it, follow it! Hitch your minds to this navys sterns and leave your England, silent as midnight, guarded by grandfathers, babies, and old women. For what male subject is there old enough for his chin to be graced with even one hair who doesnt want to follow this select band of hand-picked knights to France? Once there, make your thoughts work harder, and witness a siege. Take in the wheeled canons with their deadly gaping mouths trained on the walled city of Harfleur. Imagine the French ambassador returning to inform Harry that the king offers him	Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies In motion of no less celerity Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen The well-appointed king at Hampton pier Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning. Play with your fancies and in them behold, Upon the hempen tackle, shipboys climbing. Hear the shrill whistle, which doth order give To sounds confused. Behold the threaden sails, Borne with th' invisible and creeping wind, Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea, Breasting the lofty surge. Oh, do but think You stand upon the rivage and behold A city on th' inconstant billows dancing, For so appears this fleet majestical Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow! Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy And leave your England, as dead midnight still, Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women, Either past or not arrived to pith and puissance, For who is he whose chin is but enriched With one appearing hair that will not follow These culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to France? Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege. Behold the ordnance on their carriages, With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur. Suppose th' Ambassador from the French comes back, Tells Harry that the king doth offer him
Attack the breach in the city wall once more, dear friends, attack it once moreor else lets close it up with English corpses. In peacetime, nothing looks better in a man than restraint and humility. But when the battle trumpet blows in our ears, then its time to act like the tiger. With muscles taut and blood stirred up, hide your civilized nature under the guise of ugly rage. Lend your eyes a terrifying gleam and let them jut out from the portholes of the head like brass cannon. Make your brow jut out over your eyes like a frightening cliff over the wild and desolate ocean. Now grit your teeth and let your nostrils flare. Take a deep breath and draw on every impulse to its fullest strength. On, on, you noblest Englishmen, descended as you are from battle-tested fathers, fathers who, like so many Alexander the Greats, have fought in these regions from morning until night, sheathing their swords only when there was no one left to fight. Dont dishonor your mothers! Prove that the men you call your fathers did truly conceive you. Serve as an example to men of common birth and teach them how to fight. And you, good farmers, whose limbs were made in England, show us here the vigor of your upbringing. Prove you are worthy of your birth, which I do not doubt for a moment. For there isnt one of you so low-born that your eyes dont shine with noble luster. I see youre standing like greyhounds	Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more, Or close the wall up with our English dead! In peace theres nothing so becomes a man As modest stillness and humility, But when the blast of war blows in our ears, Then imitate the action of the tiger: Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood, Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage, Then lend the eye a terrible aspect, Let pry through the portage of the head Like the brass cannon, let the brow o'erwhelm it As fearfully as doth a galld rock O'erhang and jutty his confounded base, Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean. Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide, Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit To his full height. On, on, you noblest English, Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof, Fathers that, like so many Alexanders, Have in these parts from morn till even fought And sheathed their swords for lack of argument. Dishonor not your mothers. Now attest That those whom you called fathers did beget you. Be copy now to men of grosser blood, And teach them how to war. And you, good yeoman, Whose limbs were made in England, show us here The mettle of your pasture. Let us swear That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not,
On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!	On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!
Please, corporal, stop! The fighting is too violent. Speaking for myself, I only have one life, not dozens. Too violent! Thats just how it is, the plain truth of it.	Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are too hot, and, formine own part, I have not a case of lives. The humor of it istoo hot; that is the very plainsong of it.
The plain truth doesnt lie. You can see how it is all around. Fighting comes and goes, Gods loyal servants drop and die. (he sings) And sword and shield In bloody field Will win immortal fame.	The plainsong is most just, for humors do abound. (sings) Knocks go and come. Gods vassals drop and die, And sword and shield In bloody field Doth win immortal fame.
I wish I were in an alehouse in London! I would give all my glory for a mug of ale and safety.	Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would give all myfame for a pot of ale, and safety.
Me too. (he sings) If wishes could avail me, My purpose would not fail me, Its there that I would go.	And I. (sings) If wishes would prevail with me, My purpose should not fail with me, But thither would I hie.
(singing) As surely but more poorly Than birds sing on the bough.	(sings) As duly, But not as truly, As bird doth sing on bough.
Up to the breach, you dogs! Go! Get a move on, you scrotems!	Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!
What has the governor of the town decided? This is the final discussion I will grant. So submit to my mercy or, like men who revel in their own destruction, challenge me to do my worst. For, as I am a soldier, the name I think suits me best, once I begin my attack on Harfleur again, I will not leave the half-conquered town until she lies buried in her own ashes. The gates of mercy will be closed by then, and harsh and hard-hearted soldiers, who have tasted blood, will have free reign to commit whatever violence they want, mowing down your lovely young virgins and budding infants. What will it matter to me, since you will have brought it on yourselves, if sacrilegious war, dressed in red like Satan, his face blackened by smoke, should commit every form of savage destruction and ruin? What will it matter to me if your innocent maidens are raped, since you will have asked for it? What power can rein in promiscuous evil once its gotten rolling? We might as well send orders to the whale to come ashore as try to restore order in soldiers carried away with their looting. Therefore, you men of Harfleur, take pity on your town and on your people while I still have control over my men, while the cool and moderate winds of mercy still have power to disperse the depraved, infected clouds of murder, plunder, and crazed soldiers defile your shrieking daughters with their foul hands, and your fathers dragged by their silver beards, their reverend heads dashed against the walls. Expect to see your naked babies skewered upon pikes while their	How yet resolves the governor of the town? This is the latest parle we will admit. Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves Or, like to men proud of destruction, Defy us to our worst. For, as I am a soldier, A name that in my thoughts becomes me best, If I begin the batt'ry once again, I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur Till in her ashes she lie burid. The gates of mercy shall be all shut up, And the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart, In liberty of bloody hand, shall range With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants. What is it then to me if impious war, Arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends, Do with his smirched complexion all fell feats Enlinked to waste and desolation? What is t to me, when you yourselves are cause, If your pure maidens fall into the hand Of hot and forcing violation? What rein can hold licentious wickedness When down the hill he holds his fierce career? We may as bootless spend our vain command Upon th' enragd soldiers in their spoil As send precepts to the Leviathan To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur, Take pity of your town and of your people Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command, Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
(speaking in French, for the entire scene) Alice, you have been to England and you know the language.	Alice, tu as t en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage.
(speaking in French, for the entire scene) A little, madam.	Un peu, madame.
Please teach me English. I must learn to speak it. What is the word for la main in English?	Je te prie, m'enseignez. Il faut que j'apprenne parler. Comment appelez-vous la main en anglais?
La main? That is de hand.	La main? Elle est appele de hand.
De hand. And les doigts?	De hand. Et les doigts?
Les doigts? Good lord, I forget les doigts. But it will come to me. The word for les doigts, I believe, is de fangres. Yes, de fangres.	Les doigts? Ma foi, j'oublie les doigts; mais je me souviendrai. Les doigts? Je pense qu'ils sont appels defingres; oui, de fingres.
La main, de hand; les doigts, de fangres. I think I am a very apt student! I have learned two words of English already. What is the word for les ongles?	La main, de hand; les doigts, de fingres. Je pense que jesuis le bon colier. J'ai gagn deux mots d'anglais vitement.Comment appelez-vous les ongles?
Les ongles? That is de nails.	Les ongles? Nous les appelons de nails.
De nails. Listen! Tell me if Im saying it right. De hand, de fangres, et de nails.	De nails. coutez. Dites-moi si je parle bien: de hand,de fingres, et de nails.
Well done, madam. Excellent English.	C'est bien dit, madame. Il est fort bon anglais.
Tell me the English for le bras.	Dites-moi l'anglais pour le bras.
De arm, madam.	De arme, madame.
Hes certainly crossed the river Somme.	'Tis certain he hath passed the river Somme.
And if he advances unopposed, my lord, let us abandon France. Let us leave everything and give our vineyards to the barbarous nation.	An if he be not fought withal, my lord, Let us not live in France. Let us quit all And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.
God alive! Shall a few offshoots of our nation, born of our fathers lustour branches grafted to wild and savage trunksgrow to such a height that they look down with contempt on the plants from which they first sprangThe Dauphin is referring to the Nor man invasion of 1066, in which William the Conqueror and natives of Normandy conquered England.sprang?	Dieu vivant, shall a few sprays of us, The emptying of our fathers' luxury, Our scions, put in wild and savage stock, Spurt up so suddenly into the clouds And overlook their grafters?
Normans, nothing more than bastard Normans, Norman bastards! I hope I die! If they march along unopposed, I will sell my dukedom for a sodden, filthy farm in that craggy isle of Albion.	Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards! Mort de ma vie, if they march along Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom To buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.
God of battles! Where do they get this spirit? Isnt their climate foggy, cold, and dark? Doesnt the sun shine palely down on them, as though in contempt, killing their fruit with frowns? Can boiled water (beer, they call it)a drink for broken-down horses, heat their cold blood to such a valiant level? And shall our lively blood, quickened by wine, be so frosty? Oh, for the	Dieu de batailles, where have they this mettle? Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull, On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale, Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water, A drench for sur-reined jades, their barley broth,
Greetings, Captain Fluellen! Have you just come from the bridge?	How now, Captain Fluellen? Come you from the bridge?
I assure you, there are some excellent military operations being carried out at the bridge.	I assure you, there is very excellent services committed atthe bridge.
Is the duke of Exeter safe?	Is the duke of Exeter safe?
The duke of Exeter is as courageous as AgamemnonAgamemnon was the leader of the Greek army in the Trojan War. Mark Antony fought Brutus for control of the Roman Empire.Agamemnonand a man whom I love and honor deeply, with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life, and my livelihood, to the very utmost of my being. He is notGod be praised and blessedhurt in any way but is holding the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. There is a standard-bearer there at the bridge. I truly think he is as valiant a man as Mark Antony. He is a man of no rank or consequence, but I saw him fight as gallantly as though he were.	The duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon,and a man that I love and honor with my soul and my heartand my duty and my life and my living and my uttermostpower. He is not, God be praised and blessed, any hurt inthe world, but keeps the bridge most valiantly, withexcellent discipline. There is an aunchient lieutenant thereat the pridge. I think in my very conscience he is as valianta man as Mark Antony, and he is a man of no estimation inthe world, but I did see him do as gallant service.
What is his name?	What do you call him?
He is called Ensign Pistol.	He is called Aunchient Pistol.
I dont know him.	I know him not.
Here he is.	Here is the man.
Nonsense. I have the best armor in the world. I wish it were day!	Tut, I have the best armor of the world. Would it were day!
You have wonderful armor, but give my horse his due.	You have an excellent armor, but let my horse have his due.
It is the best horse in Europe.	It is the best horse of Europe.
Will it never be morning?	Will it never be morning?
My lord of Orlans, and my lord high Constable, are you talking about horses and armor?	My lord of Orlans, and my Lord High Constable, you talkof horse and armor?
You are as well provided in both respects as any prince in the world.	You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.
What a long night this is! I will not trade my horse for any that walks on four legs. He leaps from the ground as if his insides were light as hairs. Hes a flying horse, a Pegasus, breathing fire out of his nostrils. When I sit astride him, I soar, I am a hawk. He trots on air. The earth sings when he touches it. The lowest part of his hoof is more musical than Pans pipe.	What a long night is this! I will not change my horse withany that treads but on four pasterns. ha! He boundsfrom the earth, as if his entrails were hairs, le cheval volant,the Pegasus, qui a les narines de feu. When I bestride him,I soar; I am a hawk; he trots the air. The earth sings when hetouches it. The basest horn of his hoof is more musical thanthe pipe of Hermes.
Hes the color of nutmeg.	Hes of the color of the nutmeg.
And hot as ginger. He is an animal worthy of Perseus. He is pure air and fire. The duller elements of earth and water have no part in him, except in the moment of patient stillness when his rider mounts him. He is indeed worthy of the name horse, and you can call all the rest beasts.	And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for Perseus. He ispure air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and waternever appear in him, but only in patient stillness while hisrider mounts him. He is indeed a horse, and all other jadesyou may call beasts.
Now summon up the image of stealthy murmurs and engulfing darkness filling the wide vessel of the universe. From camp to camp through the dark cave of night, the noise from both armies grows so quiet that those standing watch almost think they can hear the whispered secrets of one anothers sentinels. One by one, fires are lit on both sides, and through their pale flames, each army thinks he sees the smoke-tinged faces of the other. The horses of each army answer one anothers proud, threatening neighs as they pierce the dull night, and from the tents the sound of the blacksmiths' hammers as they fit out the knights, closing rivets up, adds a note of fear to the preparations. The country cocks crow and the clocks toll, sounding a drowsy three o'clock in the morning. Proud of their army and secure in their numbers, the confident and overeager French play dice, betting on how many worthless Englishmen each will capture. They scold the limping, slowly moving night, which, like an ugly old woman, takes so long to pass. The poor doomed English, like sacrificial beasts, sit patiently, and privately contemplate the dangers that will arrive with morning. With their grave faces, emaciated cheeks, and war-torn coats, they seem to the gazing moon like so many horrifying ghosts. Now, whoever spots the royal captain of this ruined army walking from camp to camp, from tent to tent, let him cry Praise and glory on his head! For out he goes visiting all his troops. He bids them good morning with a modest smile and calls	Now entertain conjecture of a time When creeping murmur and the poring dark Fills the wide vessel of the universe. From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night, The hum of either army stilly sounds, That the fixed sentinels almost receive The secret whispers of each others watch. Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames Each battle sees the others umbered face. Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs Piercing the nights dull ear; and from the tents The armorers, accomplishing the knights, With busy hammers closing rivets up, Give dreadful note of preparation. The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll, And, the third hour of drowsy morning named, Proud of their numbers and secure in soul, The confident and overlusty French Do the low-rated English play at dice And chide the cripple, tardy-gaited night, Who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp So tediously away. The poor condemnd English, Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires Sit patiently and inly ruminate The mornings danger; and their gesture sad, Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats, Presenteth them unto the gazing moon So many horrid ghosts. Oh, now, who will behold The royal captain of this ruined band
Gloucester, its true that we are in great danger. But our courage should only be the greater for that. Good morning, brother Bedford. God Almighty, there must be some essential goodness even in evil, if men would only look for it. In our case, our bad neighbors over their make us early risers, a healthy and sensible thing to be. Besides, they act as outward consciences and preachers to us all, a visible reminder that we should prepare ourselves for death. Think like that, and youll manage to get honey out of a common weed and find a moral lesson in the devil himself.	Gloucester, tis true that we are in great danger. The greater therefore should our courage be. Good morrow, brother Bedford. God almighty, There is some soul of goodness in things evil, Would men observingly distill it out. For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers, Which is both healthful and good husbandry. Besides, they are our outward consciences And preachers to us all, admonishing That we should dress us fairly for our end. Thus may we gather honey from the weed And make a moral of the devil himself.
	A good soft pillow for that good white head Were better than a churlish turf of France.
Not at all, my liege. I prefer these quarters, since they allow me to say, Now I live like a king.	Not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better, Since I may say, Now lie I like a king.
Its good for men to be given an example of how to take pleasure in discomfort. It eases the spirit. And when the mind is engaged, the rest of the body, dead and dull before, wakes up and comes to life with a new nimbleness and sensitivity, like a snake shedding its dead skin. Lend me your cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers, give my regards to the princes in our camp. Say good day to them from me and ask them to come to my tent.	'Tis good for men to love their present pains Upon example. So the spirit is eased. And when the mind is quickened, out of doubt, The organs, though defunct and dead before, Break up their drowsy grave and newly move, With casted slough and fresh legerity. Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both, Commend me to the princes in our camp, Do my good morrow to them, and anon Desire them all to my pavilion.
The sun glints off our armor. Awake, my lords!	The sun doth gild our armor. Up, my lords.
Mount up our horses! Bring my horse, lackey! Ha!	Montez cheval! My horse, varlet! Lackey! Ha!
Oh, brave spirit!	O brave spirit!
Hell take me through flood and field.	Via les eaux et la terre.
Is that all? How about air and fire?	Rien puis? L'air et feu?
Just the heavens, cousin Orlans.	Cieux, cousin Orlans.
	
Listen to our horses neighing, longing to be working.	Hark how our steeds for present service neigh.
Mount them and dig your spurs into their flanks so that their hot blood may spurt in English eyes and douse them with some of the spare courage we have around. Ha!	Mount them and make incision in their hides, That their hot blood may spin in English eyes And dout them with superfluous courage. Ha!
What, you want them to weep our horses' blood? Then how will we see their own natural tears?	What, will you have them weep our horses' blood? How shall we then behold their natural tears?
Where is the king?	Where is the king?
The king rode out alone to view their troops.	The king himself is rode to view their battle.
They have fully sixty thousand fighting men.	Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.
Thats five to one. Besides, theyre fresh.	Theres five to one. Besides, they all are fresh.
May Gods arm strike on our side! These are frightening odds. God be with all of you, princes. Ill go and join my men. If we dont meet again before we meet in heaven, still well meet joyfully. My noble Lord of Bedford, my dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter, and my kind kinsmen, warriors all, adieu.	Gods arm strike with us! 'Tis a fearful odds. God be wi' you, princes all. Ill to my charge. If we no more meet till we meet in heaven, Then joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford, My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter, And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu.
Farewell, good Salisbury; and may good luck go with you.	Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee.
Farewell, kind lord. Fight valiantly today. But then I do you wrong to say as much, since you are the very embodiment of bravery.	Farewell, kind lord. Fight valiantly today. And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it, For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.
He is as full of courage as of kindness, princely in both.	He is as full of valor as of kindness, Princely in both.
Surrender, dog!	Yield, cur.
(speaking in French) You seem like a gentleman of high rank.	Je pense que vous tes gentilhomme de bonne qualit.
Qualtitie calmie custurePistol is speaking nonsense as though it were a real for eign tongue.custure me! Are you a gentleman? What is your name? Expound.	Qualtitie calmie custure me. Art thou a gentleman? Whatis thy name? Discuss.
(speaking in French) Oh, God above!	Seigneur Dieu!
This man, one O. Signieur DewPistol misunder stands the French man to be saying his name is O. ignieur Dew. Be cause seigneur means lord, Pis ol thinks his pris oner is a nobleman.O. Signieur Dew, must be a gentleman. Consider my words, O. Signieur Dew, and take note: O. Signieur Dew, youll be killed with my sword unless you pay me an absurd amount of money for your ransom.	O Seigneur Dew should be a gentleman. Perpend mywords, O Seigneur Dew, and mark: O Seigneur Dew, thoudiest on point of fox, except, O Seigneur, thou do give to meegregious ransom.
(speaking in French) Oh, have mercy! Take pity on me!	, prenez misricorde! Ayez piti de moi!
(mistaking moi, the French word for me, as a unit of money) One moy is not enough. I must have forty moys, or I will reach into your throat and pull out some moys, along with a lot of blood.	Moy shall not serve. I will have forty moys, or I will fetchthy rim out at thy throat in drops of crimson blood.
(speaking in French) Is it impossible to escape your mighty arm?	Est-il impossible d'chapper la force de ton bras?
O, hell!	diable!
O Lord, the day is lost! All is lost!	seigneur! Le jour est perdu, tout est erdu!
Dear God! All is lost, all! Regret and everlasting shame sit on our helmets, mocking us.	Mort de ma vie, all is confounded, all! Reproach and everlasting shame Sits mocking in our plumes.
	Do not run away.
Our men have all broken ranks.	Why, all our ranks are broke.
O, everlasting shame! Lets fall on our swords. Are these the wretches that we threw dice for?	O perdurable shame! Lets stab ourselves. Be these the wretches that we played at dice for?
Is this the king we offered to ransom?	Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
Shame, eternal shame, and nothing but shame! Let us die honorably. Back into the fray once again! He who will not follow me now, let him depart and stand in the doorway like a pimp, cap in hand, while some slave, no nobler than my dog, violates his daughter.	Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame! Let us die. In once more! Back again! And he that will not follow Bourbon now, Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand Like a base pander hold the chamber door, Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog, His fairest daughter is contaminate.
Maybe we can benefit from the same chaos that has defeated us. Lets go offer up our lives en masse.	Disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now. Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.
We have done well, my valiant countrymen. But its not over. The French are still fighting.	Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen, But alls not done. Yet keep the French the field.
The duke of York sends your Majesty his respects.	The duke of York commends him to your Majesty.
Is he still alive, good uncle? Three times in an hour I saw him down, and three times up again and fighting. He was covered with blood from his helmet to his spurs.	Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour I saw him down, thrice up again and fighting. From helmet to the spur, all blood he was.
The valiant soldier is still dressed like that, lying on the ground, drenching the field with his blood. By his side lies the noble earl of Suffolk, Yorks comrade and equal in brave wounds. Suffolk died first, and York, cut to pieces, came to him where he lay in his blood and took him by the face, kissing his gashes. He cried out, Wait for me, dear cousin. My soul will keep yours company on the way to heaven. Wait for mine, sweet soul. Well fly there side by side, just as we stood together as brother-knights in this glorious and well-fought battle! At this, I went to comfort him. He smiled at me close, gave me his hand, gripping me feebly, and said, My dear lord, commend my service to my king. With that, he turned and threw his wounded arm around Suffolks neck and kissed his lips. And so,	In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie, Larding the plain, and by his bloody side, Yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds, The noble earl of Suffolk also lies. Suffolk first died, and York, all haggled over, Comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes That bloodily did yawn upon his face. And cries aloud, Tarry, my cousin Suffolk. My soul shall thine keep company to heaven. Tarry, sweet soul, for mine; then fly abreast, As in this glorious and well-foughten field We kept together in our chivalry. Upon these words I came and cheered him up. He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand, And with a feeble grip, says Dear my lord, Commend my service to my sovereign. So did he turn, and over Suffolks neck
To kill the boys with the luggage! Its expressly against the rules of combat. Its as complete a work of villainy as any that could be thought up. Tell me, dont you think so?	Kill the poys and the luggage! 'Tis expressly against the lawof arms. 'Tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, ascan be offert, in your conscience now, is it not?
Theres certainly not a boy left alive, and it was done by the cowardly rascals who were running from the battle. On top of this, theyve either burned or carried away everything that was in the kings tent. So the king has quite rightly ordered that every prisoners throat be cut. Oh, hes a gallant king!	'Tis certain theres not a boy left alive, and the cowardlyrascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter.Besides, they have burned and carried away all that was inthe kings tent, wherefore the king, most worthily, hathcaused every soldier to cut his prisoners throat. Oh, tis agallant king!
Yes, he was born at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What is the name of the town where Alexander the PigFluellen pronounces p for b he means big.Pig was born?	Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What callyou the towns name where Alexander the Pig was born?
Alexander the Great.	Alexander the Great.
And is pig not the same as great, may I ask? The pig or the mighty or the huge or the magnanimousthey all mean the same thing, with some variation.	Why, I pray you, is not pig great? The pig, or the great,or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous are all onereckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. His father was Philip of Macedon, as I remember.	I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. Hisfather was called Philip of Macedon, as I take it.
I think that Macedon is indeed where Alexander was born. I tell you, Captain, if you look at a map of the world, Ill bet you will find, comparing Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, see, are very similar.	I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn. I tell you,Captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, I warrant youshall find, in the comparisons between Macedon andMonmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike.
Im sure it is to knight you, Captain.	I warrant it is to knight you, Captain.
As it is Gods will and pleasure, Captain, I entreat you to come quickly to the king. There is more good fortune in store for you than you could ever imagine.	Gods will and His pleasure, Captain, I beseech you now,come apace to the king. There is more good toward youperadventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.
Sir, do you recognize this glove?	Sir, know you this glove?
Know the glove! I know the glove is a glove.	Know the glove! I know the glove is a glove.
Well, I recognize this one (indicates the glove FLUELLEN wears in his cap), and I hereby challenge you. (strikes him)	I know this, and thus I challenge it. (strikes him)
Good God! As absolute a traitor as any in the whole entire worldor even France or England!	'Sblood, an arrant traitor as any s in the universal world, orin France, or in England!
What is this, you villain!	How now, sir? You villain!
Do you think Id break my oath?	Do you think Ill be forsworn?
Stand aside, Captain Gower. Ill reward treason with blows, I promise you.	Stand away, Captain Gower. I will give treason his paymentinto plows, I warrant you.
Im not a traitor.	I am no traitor.
An infamous lie! I accuse you in the name of the king. Arrest him: hes a friend of the duke of Alenons.	Thats a lie in thy throat.I charge you in his Majestysname, apprehend him. Hes a friend of the Duke Alenons.
Allow me to fill in the gaps for those of you who have not read this story. As for those who have, I beg you to excuse the gaps in time, and the many people and things that cannot be represented here in all their magnitude and proper form. Lets bring the king now to Calais. Imagine him there and, having seen him there, haul him back across the sea on the wings of your imagination. Theres the coast of England: see how the sea seems to be fenced in by the men and wives and boys who line the shore, their shouts and wild applause drowning out the deep roar of the surf. As the kings ship draws near, the very ocean is like a man running before the king, preparing his way. Lets have him land and solemnly proceed to London. Thoughts work so quickly that even now you can imagine him on Blackheath, where his lords suggest that he should carry his battle-scarred sword and helmet on a procession through the city. He refuses, as he is free of vanity and self-serving pride and ascribes all the glory and responsibility for victory to God. Now in the factory of thought, create the image of all London pouring forth into the streets. Picture the mayor and all his brother citizens dressed in their best as they go forth like senators of ancient Rome to welcome home their conquering Caesar. Imagine if our own queens general returned from Ireland, having stamped out the rebellion there, as we hope he does very soon, how many people would leave the city to come welcome him. Even more people than that welcomed Harry home,	Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story That I may prompt them; and of such as have, I humbly pray them to admit th' excuse Of time, of numbers, and due course of things, Which cannot in their huge and proper life Be here presented. Now we bear the king Toward Calais. Grant him there. There seen, Heave him away upon your wingd thoughts Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys, Whose shouts and claps outvoice the deep-mouthed sea, Which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the king Seems to prepare his way. So let him land, And solemnly see him set on to London. So swift a pace hath thought that even now You may imagine him upon Blackheath, Where that his lords desire him to have borne His bruisd helmet and his bended sword Before him through the city. He forbids it, Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride, Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent Quite from himself, to God. But now behold, In the quick forge and workinghouse of thought, How London doth pour out her citizens. The Mayor and all his brethren in best sort, Like to the senators of th' antique Rome, With the plebeians swarming at their heels, Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in As, by a lower but loving likelihood,
Yes, thats true, but why are you wearing your leek today? Saint Davys Day has passed.	Nay, thats right. But why wear you your leek today? Saint Davys day is past.
There are reasons and causes why and how in everything. Ill tell you as my friend, Captain Gower: that rascally, mean, beggarly, lousy, bragging Pistol, whom you and yourself and all the world know to be no better than a peasantseewith no good qualities at all: he came to me yesterday and brought me bread and salt and told me to eat my leek. We were somewhere where I couldnt pick a fight with him, but Ive decided to wear it in my cap until I see him again, whereupon Ill give him a little piece of my mind.	There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in allthings. I will tell you as my friend, Captain Gower. Therascally, scald, beggarly, lousy, pragging knave, Pistol,which you and yourself and all the world know to be nopetter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is cometo me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, andbid me eat my leek. It was in place where I could not breedno contention with him, but I will be so bold as to wear it inmy cap till I see him once again, and then I will tell him alittle piece of my desires.
And here he comes, puffing himself up like a turkey.	Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.
Never mind his puffings and his turkeys. God bless you, Ensign Pistol! You lousy, rotten, villain, God bless you!	'Tis no matter for his swellings, nor his turkey-cocks. God pless you, Aunchient Pistol, you scurvy, lousy knave, God pless you.
Are you mad? Do you want me to cut your life short, you deceiving lowlife? Away! The smell of leek turns my stomach.	Ha, art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Trojan, to haveme fold up Parcas fatal web? Hence. I am qualmish at thesmell of leek.
I wonder if youd be so good, you lousy, rotten villain, to grant my wish and my request and gratify me, see, by eating this leek. Id like you to, see, because you dont like it, and because it isnt to your taste, and because it doesnt agree with you.	I peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave, at my desires,and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, thisleek. Because, look you, you do not love it, nor youraffections and your appetites and your digestions does notagree with it, I would desire you to eat it.
Peace to this occasion thats brought us all together. Health and good day to our brother the king of France and to our sister the queen. Joy and good wishes to our lovely royal cousin, Katherine. And you, Duke of Burgundy, who brought this great assembly together, we salute you as descendent and member of this royal family. And a health to all you lords and princes of France.	Unto our brother France and to our sister, Health and fair time of day.Joy and good wishes To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine. And, as a branch and member of this royalty, By whom this great assembly is contrived, We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy. And princes French, and peers, health to you all. Peace to this meeting wherefore we are met.
We rejoice to see you, most worthy brother of England. You are welcome here, as are all of you English princes.	Right joyous are we to behold your face, Most worthy brother England. Fairly met. So are you, princes English, every one.
Brother of England, may this meeting prove as fruitful as it is joyous. We are glad to look upon your facea face whose eyes have until now carried in them a glance as deadly, for any Frenchman they alighted on, as the poisonous eyes of those mythical lizards, the basilisks. We hope your poison has worn off and this day shall transform all grievances and quarrels into friendship.	So happy be the issue, brother England, Of this good day and of this gracious meeting, As we are now glad to behold your eyes Your eyes which hitherto have borne in them Against the French that met them in their bent The fatal balls of murdering basilisks. The venom of such looks, we fairly hope, Have lost their quality, and that this day Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
Were here to say amen to that.	To cry Amen to that, thus we appear.
All you English princes, I salute you. 	You English princes all, I do salute you. 
Get out of here! Go home, you lazy men. What, is today a holiday? Dont you know that working men arent supposed to walk around on a workday without wearing their work clothes? You there, speak up. Whats your occupation?	Hence! Home, you idle creatures get you home! Is this a holiday? What, know you not, Being mechanical, you ought not walk Upon a laboring day without the sign Of your profession?Speak, what trade art thou?
Im a carpenter, sir.	Why, sir, a carpenter.
Where are your leather apron and your ruler? What are you doing, wearing your best clothes? And you, sir, whats your trade?	Where is thy leather apron and thy rule? What dost thou with thy best apparel on? You, sir, what trade are you?
Well, compared to a fine workman, you might call me a mere cobbler.	Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but, as youwould say, a cobbler.
But whats your trade? Answer me straightforwardly.	But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.
It is a trade, sir, that I practice with a clear conscience. I am a mender of worn soles.	A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a safe conscience,which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
What trade, boy? You insolent rascal, what trade?	What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?
Sir, please, dont be angry. But if your soles are worn out, I can mend you.	Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me. Yet, if you beout, sir, I can mend you.
What do you mean by that? Mend me, you impertinent fellow?!	What meanst thou by that? Mend me, thou saucyfellow?
Cobble you, sir.	Why, sir, cobble you.
Youre a cobbler, are you?	Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
Sir, I make my living using an awl. I stick to my work; I dont meddle in politics or chase women. Im a surgeon to old shoes. When theyre endangered, I save them. The noblest men who ever walked on leather have walked on my handiwork.	Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl. I meddle with notradesmans matters nor womens matters, but withal I amindeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes. When they are in greatdanger, I recover them. As proper men as ever trod uponneats leather have gone upon my handiwork.
But why arent you in your shop today? Why are you leading these men through the streets?	But wherefore art not in thy shop today? Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
Well, to wear out their shoes and get myself more work. Seriously, though, we took the day off to see Caesar, sir, and celebrate his triumph.	Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself into morework. But indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar and torejoice in his triumph.
Why would you celebrate it? What victory does he bring home? What foreign lands has he conquered and captive foreigners chained to his chariot wheels? You blockheads, you unfeeling men! You hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome, didnt you know PompeyCaesar has just conquered the sons of his deceased enemy Pompey. He as won in a civil war, not a foreign conquest.Pompey? Many times you climbed up on walls and battlements, towers and windowseven chimney topswith your babies in your arms, and sat there patiently all day waiting to see great Pompey ride through the streets of Rome. And when you caught a glimpse of his chariot, didnt you shout so loud that the river Tiber shook as it echoed? And now you put on your best clothes? And now you take a holiday?	Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home? What tributaries follow him to Rome To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels? You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things, O you hard hearts, you crul men of Rome, Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft Have you climbed up to walls and battlements, To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops, Your infants in your arms, and there have sat The livelong day with patient expectation To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome. And when you saw his chariot but appear, Have you not made an universal shout That Tiber trembled underneath her banks To hear the replication of your sounds Made in her concave shores? And do you now put on your best attire? And do you now cull out a holiday?
	That comes in triumph over Pompeys blood? Be gone! Run to your houses, fall upon your knees, Pray to the gods to intermit the plague That needs must light on this ingratitude.
Go, go, good countrymen, and to make up for having done wrong, gather up all the poor men like yourselves, lead them to the Tiber, and weep into the river until it overflows its banks.	Go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault, Assemble all the poor men of your sort, Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears Into the channel till the lowest stream Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
	They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness. Go you down that way towards the Capitol. This way will I. Disrobe the images If you do find them decked with ceremonies.
Can we do that? You know its the feast of LupercalThe feast of Lupercal is an annual celebration to honor the Roman god Lupercus (called Pan in Greek mythology).Lupercal.	May we do so? You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
It doesnt matter. Make sure that none of the statues are decorated in tribute to Caesar. Ill walk around and force the commoners off the streets. You do the same, wherever the crowds are thick. If we take away Caesars support, hell have to come back down to earth; otherwise, hell fly too high and keep the rest of us in a state of fear and obedience.	It is no matter. Let no images Be hung with Caesars trophies. Ill about And drive away the vulgar from the streets. So do you too, where you perceive them thick. These growing feathers plucked from Caesars wing Will make him fly an ordinary pitch, Who else would soar above the view of men And keep us all in servile fearfulness.
Calphurnia!	Calphurnia!
Quiet! Caesars talking.	Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.
Calphurnia!	Calphurnia!
Im here, my lord.	Here, my lord.
Stand right in Antoniuss path when he runs the race. Antonius!	Stand you directly in Antonius' way When he doth run his course.Antonius!
Yes, Caesar?	Caesar, my lord.
Antonius, after you take off, dont forget to touch Calphurnia, because our wise elders say that if you touch an infertile woman during this holy race, shell be freed from the curse of sterility.	Forget not in your speed, Antonius, To touch Calphurnia, for our elders say The barren, touchd in this holy chase, Shake off their sterile curse.
Ill remember. When Caesar says do this, it is done.	I shall remember. When Caesar says, do this, it is performed.
Continue, then, and dont forget to perform all of the rituals.	Set on, and leave no ceremony out.
Caesar!	Caesar!
Good evening, Casca. Did you accompany Caesar home? Why are you breathless, and why are you staring like that?	Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home? Why are you breathless? And why stare you so?
Arent you disturbed when the earth itself is shaking and swaying as if it were a flimsy thing? Cicero, Ive seen storms in which the angry winds split old oak trees, and Ive seen the ocean swell, rage, and foam, as if it wanted to reach the storm clouds, but never before tonight, never until now, have I experienced a storm that drops fire. Either there are wars in heaven, or else the world, too insolent toward the gods, provokes them to send destruction.	Are not you moved when all the sway of earth Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero, I have seen tempests when the scolding winds Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen Th' ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam To be exalted with the threatening clouds, But never till tonight, never till now, Did I go through a tempest dropping fire. Either there is a civil strife in heaven, Or else the world, too saucy with the gods, Incenses them to send destruction.
Whathave you seen something so strange that it is clearly an omen from the gods?	Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
A common slaveyoud know him if you saw himheld up his left hand, which flamed and burned like twenty torches together. And yet his hand was immune to the fire and didnt get burned. AlsoIve kept my sword unsheathed since I saw thisin front of the Capitol I met a lion who looked at me and strutted by without bothering to attack me. And there were a hundred spooked women huddled together in fear who swore they saw men on fire walk up and down the streets.	A common slaveyou know him well by sight Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn Like twenty torches joined, and yet his hand, Not sensible of fire, remained unscorched. BesidesI ha' not since put up my sword Against the Capitol I met a lion, Who glared upon me and went surly by, Without annoying me. And there were drawn Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women, Transformd with their fear, who swore they saw Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.
Lucius, are you there? I cant tell by the position of the stars how near it is to daybreakLucius, are you there? I wish I had that weakness, to sleep too soundly. Come on, Lucius! Wake up, I say! Lucius!	What, Lucius, ho! I cannot by the progress of the stars Give guess how near to day.Lucius, I say! I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly. When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!
Did you call me, my lord?	Called you, my lord?
Put a candle in my study, Lucius. Call me when its lit.	Get me a taper in my study, Lucius. When it is lighted, come and call me here.
I will, my lord.	I will, my lord.
The only way is to kill Caesar. I have no personal reason to strike at himonly the best interest of the people. He wants to be crowned. The question is, how would being king change him? Evil can come from good, just as poisonous snakes tend to come out into the open on bright sunny dayswhich means we have to walk carefully. If we crown him, I have to admit wed be giving him the power to do damage.	It must be by his death, and for my part I know no personal cause to spurn at him But for the general. He would be crowned. How that might change his nature, theres the question. It is the bright day that brings forth the adder And that craves wary walking. Crown him that, And then I grant we put a sting in him That at his will he may do danger with.
Neither the sky nor the earth have been quiet tonight. Calphurnia cried out three times in her sleep, Help, someone! Theyre murdering Caesar! Whos there?	Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight. Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out, Help, ho! They murder Caesar!Whos within?
My lord?	My lord.
Go tell the priests to perform a sacrifice immediately, and bring me their interpretation of the results.	Go bid the priests do present sacrifice And bring me their opinions of success.
I will, my lord.	I will, my lord.
What are you doing, Caesar? Are you planning to go out? Youre not leaving the house today.	What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth? You shall not stir out of your house today.
I will go out. The things that threaten me have only seen my back. When they see the face of Caesar, they will vanish.	Caesar shall forth. The things that threatened me Ne'er looked but on my back. When they shall see The face of Caesar, they are vanishd.
Caesar, I never believed in omens, but now they frighten me. A servant told me the night-watchmen saw horrid sights too, but different ones from what we heard and saw. A lioness gave birth in the streets, and graves cracked open and thrust out their dead.	Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies, Yet now they fright me. There is one within, Besides the things that we have heard and seen, Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch. A lioness hath whelpd in the streets, And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead.
(reading aloud from the letter) Caesar, beware of Brutus. Watch Cassius. Dont go near Casca. Keep an eye on Cinna. Dont trust Trebonius. Pay attention to Metellus Cimber. Decius Brutus doesnt love you. Youve wronged Caius Ligarius. These men all have one intention, and its directed against Caesar. If you arent immortal, watch those around you. A sense of security opens the door to conspiracy. I pray that the mighty gods defend you! Your friend, Artemidorus. Ill stand here until Caesar passes by, and Ill give him this as though its a petition. My heart regrets that good men arent safe from the bite of jealous rivals. If you read this, Caesar, you might live. If not, the Fates are on the side of the traitors.	(reads aloud) Caesar, beware of Brutus. Take heed of Cassius. Come not near Casca. Have an eye to Cinna. Trust not Trebonius. Mark well Metellus Cimber. Decius Brutus loves thee not. Thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against Caesar. If thou beest not immortal, look about you. Security gives way to conspiracy. The mighty gods defend thee! Thy lover, Artemidorus Here will I stand till Caesar pass along, And as a suitor will I give him this. My heart laments that virtue cannot live Out of the teeth of emulation. If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayst live. If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.
Boy, I beg you to run to the senate house. Dont stay to answer meget going. Why are you still standing there?	I prithee, boy, run to the senate house. Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone. Why dost thou stay?
To find out what you want me to do there, madam.	To know my errand, madam.
I want you there and back again before I can even tell you what you should do there. (to herself, so that no one can hear her) Oh, let my determination keep me from speaking what is in my heart! I have a mans mind, but only a womans strength. How hard it is for women to keep secrets! (to LUCIUS) Are you still here?	I would have had thee there and here again Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there. O constancy, be strong upon my side, Set a huge mountain tween my heart and tongue! I have a mans mind but a womans might. How hard it is for women to keep counsel! Art thou here yet?
Madam, what should I do? Run to the Capitol and nothing else? And then return to you and nothing else?	Madam, what should I do? Run to the Capitol, and nothing else? And so return to you, and nothing else?
Yes, return and tell me if your master looks well, because he was sick when he left. And pay attention to what Caesar does and which men are close to him. Listen, boy! Whats that noise?	Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well, For he went sickly forth. And take good note What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him. Hark, boy! What noise is that?
I dont hear anything, madam.	I hear none, madam.
I beg you, listen well. I heard a noise like a scuffle. The wind brings it from the Capitol.	Prithee, listen well. I heard a bustling rumor like a fray, And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
Truly, madam, I dont hear anything.	Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.
(to the SOOTHSAYER) March 15th has come.	(to the SOOTHSAYER) The ides of March are come.
Yes, Caesar, but its not gone yet.	Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
(offering his letter) Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.	(offering his letter) Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.
(offering CAESAR another paper) Trebonius wants you to look over his humble petition, at your leisure.	(offering CAESAR another paper) Trebonius doth desire you to o'er-read, At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
Oh, Caesar, read mine first, for my petition affects you more directly. Read it, great Caesar.	O Caesar, read mine first, for mines a suit That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.
Whatever pertains to myself I will deal with last.	What touches us ourself shall be last served.
Dont delay, Caesar. Read it instantly.	Delay not, Caesar. Read it instantly.
What, is the man insane?	What, is the fellow mad?
(to ARTEMIDORUS) Stand aside, you.	(to ARTEMIDORUS)Sirrah, give place.
(to ARTEMIDORUS) What? Are you pressing your petition on the street? Go to the Capitol.	(to ARTEMIDORUS) What, urge you your petitions in the street? Come to the Capitol.
We want answers. Give us answers.	We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
Then follow me and listen to my speech, friends. Cassius, go to the next street and divide the crowd. Let those who will hear me speak stay. Lead those away who will follow you, and well explain publicly the reasons for Caesars death.	Then follow me and give me audience, friends. Cassius, go you into the other street And part the numbers. Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here. Those that will follow Cassius, go with him, And public reasons shall be renderd Of Caesars death.
Ill listen to Brutus.	I will hear Brutus speak.
Ill listen to Cassius, and we will compare their reasons.	I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons When severally we hear them renderd.
Quiet! Noble Brutus has mounted the platform.	The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence!
Be patient until I finish. Romans, countrymen, and friends! Listen to my reasons and be silent so you can hear. Believe me on my honor and keep my honor in mind, so you may believe me. Be wise when you criticize me and keep your minds alert so you can judge me fairly. If theres anyone in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesars, I say to him that my love for Caesar was no less than his. If, then, that friend demands to know why I rose up against Caesar, this is my answer: its not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more.	Be patient till the last.Romans, countrymen, and lovers! Hear me for my cause,and be silent that you may hear. Believe me for mine honor,and have respect to mine honor that you may believe.Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses thatyou may the better judge. If there be any in this assembly,any dear friend of Caesars, to him I say that Brutus' love toCaesar was no less than his. If then that friend demand whyBrutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer: not that Iloved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more.
I dreamed last night that I feasted with Caesar, and unlucky signs overwhelmed my imagination. I have no desire to go outside, yet something leads me there.	I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar, And things unlucky charge my fantasy. I have no will to wander forth of doors, Yet something leads me forth.
Whats your name?	What is your name?
Where are you going?	Whither are you going?
Where do you live?	Where do you dwell?
Are you a married man or a bachelor?	Are you a married man or a bachelor?
Answer all of us, now.	Answer every man directly.
Yes, and be brief.	Ay, and briefly.
Yes, and be wise.	Ay, and wisely.
Yes, and be truthful, if you know whats good for you.	Ay, and truly, you were best.
Whats my name? Where am I going? Where do I live? Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man briefly, wisely, and truthfullywisely I say, I am a bachelor.	What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell?Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer everyman directly and briefly, wisely and trulywisely I say, Iam a bachelor.
You imply that married men are fools. Youll get a blow from me for that, I think. Go on with what you were sayingright this instant.	Thats as much as to say they are fools that marry. Youllbear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed, directly.
Right this instant, Im going to Caesars funeral.	Directly, I am going to Caesars funeral.
These ones, then, will be assassinated. Their names are marked.	These many, then, shall die. Their names are pricked.
(to LEPIDUS) Your brother has to die too. Do you agree, Lepidus?	(to LEPIDUS) Your brother too must die. Consent you, Lepidus?
I agree	I do consent
Put a mark next to his name too, Antony.	Prick him down, Antony.
On the condition that your sisters son, Publius, also must die, Mark Antony.	Upon condition Publius shall not live, Who is your sisters son, Mark Antony.
He will die. SeeIve sealed his fate with this mark next to his name. But, Lepidus, go to Caesars house. Bring his will here, and well figure out a way to reduce his bequests to the people.	He shall not live. Look, with a spot I damn him. But, Lepidus, go you to Caesars house. Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine How to cut off some charge in legacies.
Will you be here when I return?	What, shall I find you here?
Either here or at the Capitol.	Or here, or at the Capitol.
Hes an unremarkable man, fit only to be sent on errands. Does it really make sense, once we divide the world into three parts, that he should be one of the three rulers?	This is a slight, unmeritable man, Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit, The threefold world divided, he should stand One of the three to share it?
Stop.	Stand, ho!
Pass on the command to halt!	Give the word, ho, and stand.
Whats happening now, Lucillius? Is Cassius nearby?	What now, Lucillius? Is Cassius near?
Hes nearby, and Pindarus has come to salute you on behalf of his master.	He is at hand, and Pindarus is come To do you salutation from his master.
He sends his greetings through a good man. Your master, Pindarus, either because hes changed his mind or been influenced by bad officers, has made me wish we hadnt done some of the things we did. If hes nearby, I want an explanation.	He greets me well.Your master, Pindarus, In his own change or by ill officers Hath given me some worthy cause to wish Things done, undone. But if he be at hand I shall be satisfied.
I have no doubt that my noble master will prove himself to be what he is: honorable and noble.	I do not doubt But that my noble master will appear Such as he is, full of regard and honor.
I dont doubt him. Can I have a word with you, Lucillius? (takes LUCILLIUS aside) Tell me how Cassius treated you. Put my mind at rest.	He is not doubted.A word, Lucillius. (takes LUCILLIUS aside) How he received you, let me be resolved.
He received me with courtesy and sufficient respect, but not with affection, nor with as much open and friendly conversation as he once greeted me.	With courtesy and with respect enough. But not with such familiar instances Nor with such free and friendly conference As he hath used of old.
Youve described a warm friend whos cooling off. Remember this, Lucillius. When a friend starts to get sick of you, he treats you artificially. Plain and simple loyalty doesnt make anyone act phony. But insincere men, like horses who are too lively at the start of a race, make a big show of their spirit.	Thou hast described A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucillius, When love begins to sicken and decay, It useth an enforcd ceremony. There are no tricks in plain and simple faith. But hollow men, like horses hot at hand, Make gallant show and promise of their mettle.
My evidence that you have wronged me is that you condemned and disgraced Lucius Pella for taking bribes here from the Sardinians, and you ignored my letters, where I argued that he was innocent; I know the man.	That you have wronged me doth appear in this: You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella For taking bribes here of the Sardians, Wherein my letters, praying on his side Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
You wronged yourself to write on behalf of such a man.	You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
In a time like this, it doesnt make sense to criticize every offense.	In such a time as this it is not meet That every nice offense should bear his comment.
Ill tell you, Cassius, you yourself have been called greedy and been accused of giving your positions to undeserving men in exchange for gold.	Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself Are much condemned to have an itching palm, To sell and mart your offices for gold To undeservers.
Me, greedy! You know, if you were anyone other than Brutus, that speech would be your last.	I an itching palm! You know that you are Brutus that speak this, Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
The name of Cassius gives credit to these corrupt actions, and so they go unpunished.	The name of Cassius honors this corruption, And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
Unpunished!	Chastisement!
Remember March, March 15th. Didnt great Caesar bleed for the sake of justice?	Remember March, the ides of March remember. Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
Now, Antony, our prayers have been answered. You said the enemy wouldnt come down but keep to the hills and upper regions. It seems not. Their forces are nearby. They intend to challenge us here at Philippi, responding to our challenge before weve even challenged him.	Now, Antony, our hopes are answerd. You said the enemy would not come down But keep the hills and upper regions. It proves not so. Their battles are at hand. They mean to warn us at Philippi here, Answering before we do demand of them.
I know how they think, and I understand why theyre doing this. They really wish they were somewhere else, but they want to descend on us, looking fierce so well think theyre brave. But they arent.	Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know Wherefore they do it. They could be content To visit other places, and come down With fearful bravery, thinking by this face To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage. But tis not so.
Prepare yourselves, generals. The enemy approaches with great display. They show their bloody heralds of battle, and something must be done immediately.	Prepare you, generals. The enemy comes on in gallant show. Their bloody sign of battle is hung out, And something to be done immediately.
Octavius, lead your forces slowly out to the left side of the level field.	Octavius, lead your battle softly on, Upon the left hand of the even field.
Ill go to the right side. You stay on the left.	Upon the right hand I. Keep thou the left.
Why are you defying me in this urgent matter?	Why do you cross me in this exigent?
Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these dispatches to our forces on the other side.	Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills Unto the legions on the other side.
	But cold demeanor in Octavius' wing, And sudden push gives them the overthrow. Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.
Oh, look, Titinius, look! Those villains, our soldiers, flee! Ive become an enemy to my own soldiers! This standard-bearer here of mine was running away, so I killed him and took the flag from him. (points to his flag)	O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly! Myself have to mine own turned enemy. This ensign here of mine was turning back. I slew the coward and did take it from him. (indicates his standard)
Oh, Cassius, Brutus gave the orders too soon. Having an advantage over Octavius, he took it too eagerly, and his soldiers began looting, and now were surrounded by Antonys men.	O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early, Who, having some advantage on Octavius, Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil, Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.
Retreat further, my lord, retreat further. Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord. Therefore you must run, noble Cassius.	Fly further off, my lord, fly further off. Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord. Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius. Are those my tents on fire?	This hill is far enough.Look, look, Titinius. Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
They are, my lord.	They are, my lord.
Titinius, if you love me, get on your horse and spur him on until hes brought you to those troops and back again, so that I can find out whether those troops are friends or enemies.	Titinius, if thou lovest me, Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops And here again, that I may rest assured Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
Keep on, countrymen. Oh, keep your heads up, even now!	Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
Who is so low that he wouldnt? Who will advance with me? I will proclaim my name around the field. I am the son of Marcus Cato! An enemy to tyrants and a friend to my country. I am the son of Marcus Cato!	What bastard doth not? Who will go with me? I will proclaim my name about the field. I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho! A foe to tyrants, and my countrys friend. I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus. Brutus, my countrys friend. Know that I am Brutus!	And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I! Brutus, my countrys friend. Know me for Brutus!
	Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius, And mayst be honored, being Catos son.
(to LUCILLIUS ) Surrender or you will die.	(to LUCILLIUS) Yield, or thou diest.
Id rather die. Here is some money for you to kill me immediately. Kill Brutus and be honored by the killing.	Only I yield to die. There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight. Kill Brutus, and be honored in his death.
We must not. He is a noble prisoner!	We must not. A noble prisoner!
Come, last of my friends, rest on this rock.	Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
Statilius waved the torchlight at us, but he hasnt come back. Hes been captured or killed.	Statilius showed the torchlight but, my lord, He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.
Sit down, Clitus. Killed, most likelyits become a trend. Listen, Clitus. (he whispers to CLITUS)	Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word. It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus. (whispers to CLITUS)
Who, me, my lord? No, not for all the world.	What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
Silence, then! Dont give it away.	Peace then! No words.
Id rather kill myself.	Ill rather kill myself.
Listen, Dardanius. (he whispers to DARDANIUS)	Hark thee, Dardanius. (whispers to DARDANIUS)
Would I dare do something like that?	Shall I do such a deed?
Oh Dardanius!	O Dardanius!
Oh Clitus!	O Clitus!
(speaking so that only DARDANIUS can hear) What awful thing did Brutus ask of you?	(aside to DARDANIUS) What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
(speaking so that only CLITUS can hear) To kill him, Clitus. Look, hes meditating on what to do. 	(aside to CLITUS) To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates. 
I thought the king preferred the Duke of Albany to the Duke of Cornwall.	I thought the king had more affected the Duke of Albanythan Cornwall.
We used to think so too. But the way hes divided the kingdom recently, nobody can tell which of the dukes he favors more. Hes split the kingdom so evenly that its impossible to see any indication of favoritism.	It did always seem so to us. But now in the division of thekingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most,for equalities are so weighed that curiosity in neither canmake choice of eithers moiety.
(pointing to EDMUND) Isnt this your son, my lord?	(indicating EDMUND) Is not this your son, my lord?
Yes, Ive been responsible for his upbringing. Ive had to acknowledge that hes my son so many times that now I can do it without embarrassment.	His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have sooften blushed to acknowledge him that now I am brazedto it.
I cant conceive of what you mean.	I cannot conceive you.
You cant conceive? Well, this guys mother could conceive him all to well. She grew a big belly and had a baby for her crib before she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell something naughty?	Sir, this young fellows mother could, whereupon shegrew round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for hercradle ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smella fault?
Well, I wouldnt want to undo the naughtiness, since the boy turned out so well.	I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being soproper.
But I have a legitimate son a few years older than this one, and I dont love him any more than I love my bastard. Edmund may have snuck into the world a little before his time, but his mother was pretty, we had a fun time making him, and now I have to acknowledge the guy as my son.Do you know this gentleman, Edmund?	But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year older thanthis, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knavecame something saucily to the world before he was sent for,yet was his mother fair, there was good sport at his making,and the whoreson must be acknowledged.Do you knowthis noble gentleman, Edmund?
No, I dont, my lord.	No, my lord.
(to EDMUND) This is Lord Kent. Remember him as my friend and an honorable man.	(to EDMUND) My lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter asmy honorable friend.
Very pleased to meet you, my lord.	My services to your lordship.
I look forward to getting to know you better.	I must love you and sue to know you better.
Ill try to make myself worth your knowledge.	Sir, I shall study deserving.
Hes been gone for nine years and hes leaving again soon.	He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
	
Go escort the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.	Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
Yes, my lord.	I shall, my lord.
In the meantime Ill get down to my real business.Hand me that map over there.I hereby announce that Ive divided my kingdom into three parts, which Im handing over to the younger generation so I can enjoy a little rest and peace of mind in my old age.Cornwall and Albany, my loving sons-in-law, I now want to announce publicly what each of my daughters will inherit, to avoid hostilities after I die. The two	Meantime we shall express our darker purpose. Give me the map there.Know that we have divided In three our kingdom, and tis our fast intent To shake all cares and business from our age, Conferring them on younger strengths while we Unburdened crawl toward death.Our son of Cornwall, And you, our no less loving son of Albany, We have this hour a constant will to publish
	May be prevented now. The two great princes, France and Burgundy, Great rivals in our youngest daughters love, Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn, And here are to be answered.Tell me, my daughters, (Since now we will divest us both of rule, Interest of territory, cares of state) Which of you shall we say doth love us most That we our largest bounty may extend Where nature doth with merit challenge?Goneril, Our eldest born, speak first.
Sir, I love you more than words can say. I love you more than eyesight, space, and freedom, beyond wealth or anything of value. I love you as much as life itself, and as much as status, health, beauty, or honor. I love you as much as any child has ever loved her father, with a love too deep to be spoken of. I love you more than any answer to the question How much?	Sir, I do love you more than words can wield the matter, Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty, Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare, No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor, As much as child e'er loved or father found A love that makes breath poor and speech unable. Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
(to herself) What will I say? I can only love and be silent.	(aside) What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
I give you all this land, from this line to that onedense forests, fertile fields, rivers rich with fish, wide meadows. This land will belong to your and Albanys children forever.And now what does my second daughter Regan, the wife of Cornwall, have to say? Tell me.	Of all these bounds, even from this line to this, With shadowy forests and with champains riched, With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads, We make thee lady. To thine and Albanys issue Be this perpetual.What says our second daughter, Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall? Speak.
Sir, Im made of the same stuff as my sister and consider myself just as good as she is. Shes described my feelings of love for you precisely, but her description falls a little short of the truth. I reject completely any	Sir, I am made of that self mettle as my sister, And prize me at her worth. In my true heart, I find she names my very deed of love Only she comes too short, that I profess
	Which the most precious square of sense possesses. And find I am alone felicitate In your dear highness' love.
(to herself) Poor me, what am I going to say now? But Im not poor in lovemy love is bigger than my words are.	(aside)Then poor Cordelia! And yet not so, since I am sure my loves More ponderous than my tongue.
You and your heirs hereby receive this large third of our lovely kingdom, no smaller in area or value than what I gave Goneril.Now, you, my youngest daughter, my joy, courted by the rich rulers of France and Burgundy, what can you tell me that will make me give you a bigger part of my kingdom than I gave your sisters? Speak.	To thee and thine hereditary ever Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom, No less in space, validity, and pleasure Than that conferred on Goneril.But now, our joy, Although our last and least, to whose young love The vines of France and milk of Burgundy Strive to be interessed. What can you say to draw A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.
Nothing, my lord.	Nothing, my lord.
Nothing?	Nothing?
Nothing.	Nothing.
Come on, nothing will get you nothing. Try again.	How? Nothing will come of nothing. Speak again.
Im unlucky. I dont have a talent for putting my hearts feelings into words. I love you as a child should love her father, neither more nor less.	Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave My heart into my mouth. I love your majesty According to my bond, no more nor less.
What are you saying, Cordelia? Revise your statement, or you may damage your inheritance.	How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little, Lest you may mar your fortunes.
My lord, you brought me up and loved me, and Im giving back just as I should: I obey you, love you, and	Good my lord, You have begot me, bred me, loved me. I Return those duties back as are right fit
	Why have my sisters husbands if they say They love you all? Haply when I shall wed That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry Half my love with him, half my care and duty. Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters, To love my father all.
But do you mean what youre saying?	But goes thy heart with this?
Yes, my lord.	Ay, good my lord.
So young and so cruel?	So young and so untender?
So young, my lord, and honest.	So young, my lord, and true.
Then thats the way itll be. The truth will be all the inheritance you get. I swear by the sacred sun, by the mysterious moon, and by all the planets that rule our lives, that I disown you now as my daughter. As of now, there are no family ties between us, and I consider you a stranger to me. Foreign savages who eat their own children for dinner will be as close to my heart as you, ex-daughter of mine.	Let it be so. Thy truth then be thy dower. For by the sacred radiance of the sun, The mysteries of Hecate and the night, By all the operation of the orbs From whom we do exist and cease to be Here I disclaim all my paternal care, Propinquity, and property of blood, And as a stranger to my heart and me Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian, Or he that makes his generation messes To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom Be as well neighbored, pitied, and relieved As thou my sometime daughter.
But sir	Good my liege
Be quiet, Kent. Dont get in my way when Im angry. I loved Cordelia most of all and planned to spend my old age with her taking care of me. (to CORDELIA) Go	Peace, Kent. Come not between the dragon and his wrath. I loved her most and thought to set my rest On her kind nursery.
	Hence, and avoid my sight! So be my grave my peace as here I give Her fathers heart from her.Call France. Who stirs? Call Burgundy.
	With my two daughters' dowers digest this third. Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her. I do invest you jointly with my power, Preeminence, and all the large effects That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course, With reservation of an hundred knights By you to be sustained, shall our abode Make with you by due turns. Only shall we retain The name, and all th' additions to a king. The sway, revenue, execution of the rest, Belovd sons, be yours; which to confirm, This coronet part between you. (gives CORNWALL and ALBANY the coronet)
King Lear, Ive always honored you as king, loved you as my father, obeyed you as my master, and thanked you in my prayers	Royal Lear, Whom I have ever honored as my king, Loved as my father, as my master followed, As my great patron thought on in my prayers
Im furious and ready to snap. Stay away or else Ill take my anger out on you.	The bow is bent and drawn. Make from the shaft.
Let your anger fall on me then, even if its sharpness pierces my heart. Kent can speak rudely when Lear goes mad. What are you doing, old man? When powerful kings cave in to flatterers, do you think loyal men will be afraid to speak out against it? When a majestic king starts acting silly, then its my duty to be blunt.	Let it fall rather, though the fork invade The region of my heart. Be Kent unmannerly When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man? Thinkst thou that duty shall have dread to speak When power to flattery bows? To plainness honors bound When majesty falls to folly. Reserve thy state,
	This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment, Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least, Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound Reverbs no hollowness.
Kent, if you want to stay alive, stop talking.	Kent, on thy life, no more.
I never considered my life as anything more than a chess pawn for you to play off against your enemies. Im not afraid to lose it if it helps protect you.	My life I never held but as a pawn To wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it, Thy safety being motive.
Get out of my sight!	Out of my sight!
Learn to see better, Lear, and let me stay here where you can look to me for good advice.	See better, Lear, and let me still remain The true blank of thine eye.
Now, I swear by Apollo	Now, by Apollo
By Apollo, King, youre taking the names of the gods in vain.	Now, by Apollo, King, Thou swearst thy gods in vain.
Oh, you lowlife! Scum!	O vassal! Miscreant!
Please stop, sir.	Dear sir, forbear!
Sure, kill the doctor whos trying to cure you and pay your disease. Take back your gift to Albany and Cornwall. If you dont, then as long as Im able to speak Ill keep telling you youve done a bad, bad thing.	Do, kill thy physician, and the fee bestow Upon thy foul disease. Revoke thy gift, Or whilst I can vent clamor from my throat, Ill tell thee thou dost evil.
Listen to me, you traitor. Youll pay the price for trying to make me go back on the vow I made when I bequeathed my kingdom to them. Ive never broken a vow yet. You tried to make me revise my judgment on my youngest daughter, disrespecting my power as	Hear me, recreant! On thine allegiance hear me. That thou hast sought to make us break our vows, Which we durst never yet, and with strained pride To come betwixt our sentence and our power, Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
	Five days we do allot thee for provision To shield thee from diseases of the world. And on the sixth to turn thy hated back Upon our kingdom. If on the next day following Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions, The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter, This shall not be revoked.
Farewell, King. If this is how you act, its clear that freedom has been banished from this kingdom.(to CORDELIA) I hope the gods will protect you, my dear girl, for thinking fairly and speaking correctly. (to REGAN and GONERIL) And you two, I hope your actions carry out your grand promises of love, so that big words can bring big results. Farewell to all of you. Ill carry on my old life in a new land.	Why, fare thee well, King. Sith thus thou wilt appear, Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here. (to CORDELIA) The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid, That justly thinkst and hast most rightly said! (to REGAN and GONERIL) And your large speeches may your deeds approve, That good effects may spring from words of love. Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu. Hell shape his old course in a country new.
Here are the rulers of France and Burgundy, my lord.	Heres France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
My lord the ruler of Burgundy, Ill speak to you first. Youve been competing with this king for my daughter. Whats the least that you will settle for as a dowry?A dowry is a payment traditionally made to a husband by his father-in-law at the time of marriage.dowry?	My lord of Burgundy. We first address towards you, who with this king Hath rivaled for our daughter. What in the least Will you require in present dower with her Or cease your quest of love?
Your highness, I want nothing more than what youve already offered. I know youll offer nothing less than that.	Most royal majesty, I crave no more than hath your highness offered. Nor will you tender less.
Burgundy, I valued her highly when I cared about her. But now her price has fallen. There she is, over there. If theres anything you like about that worthless little thing, then go for it. Shes all yours. But what you see is what you gether only dowry is my disapproval. There she is.	Right noble Burgundy, When she was dear to us we did hold her so, But now her price is fallen. Sir, there she stands. If aught within that little seeming substance, Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced And nothing more, may fitly like your grace, Shes there, and she is yours.
I dont know what to say.	I know no answer.
Shes got big flaws. She has no friends or protectors. I no longer love her. Her only dowry is my curse and banishment. So do you take her or leave her?	Sir, will you, with those infirmities she owes Unfriended, new adopted to our hate, Dowered with our curse and strangered with our oath Take her or leave her?
Im sorry, sir, but nobody can make a choice like this in such circumstances.	Pardon me, royal sir. Election makes not up in such conditions.
Then leave her, sir. I swear to God shes not worth anything more than what I told you. (to FRANCE) And as for you, great King of France, Id never insult our friendship by encouraging you to marry a girl I hate. So I beg you to look around for a better match than this wretched creature that you can barely call human.	Then leave her, sir, for by the power that made me, I tell you all her wealth. (to FRANCE)For you, great King, I would not from your love make such a stray To match you where I hate. Therefore beseech you T' avert your liking a more worthier way Than on a wretch whom Nature is ashamed Almost t' acknowledge hers.
This is very odd. Until very recently she was your favorite, the object of all your praise and the delight of your old age. Its strange that someone so dear to you could do anything so horrible as to warrant this sudden	This is most strange, That she that even but now was your best object The argument of your praise, balm of your age, Most best, most dearestshould in this trice of time
	So many folds of favor. Sure, her offense Must be of such unnatural degree That monsters it (or your fore-vouched affection Fall into taint), which to believe of her Must be a faith that reason without miracle Could never plant in me.
(to LEAR) Please, your majesty, I dont have a glib way with words and I only say what I mean. If I decide to do something, then I do it instead of talking about it. So I beg your majesty to let people know that it wasnt because I did something atrocious that I fell from your favor. I didnt murder or commit any immoral or lustful act. Im out of favor simply because Im not a fortune-hunter and I dont have a smooth way with wordsand Im a better person because of it, even though it has cost me your love.	(to LEAR) I yet beseech your majesty, If for I want that glib and oily art To speak and purpose notsince what I well intend, Ill do t before I speakthat you make known It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness, No unchaste action or dishonored step That hath deprived me of your grace and favor, But even for want of that for which I am richer: A still-soliciting eye and such a tongue As I am glad I have not, though not to have it Hath lost me in your liking.
Enough. It wouldve been better for you not to have been born at all than to displease me as you did.	Go to, go to. Better thou Hadst not been born than not t' have pleased me better.
You mean this is the whole problem, that she is shy and hasnt said everything she means to say and do?My lord of Burgundy, what do you have to say to this lady? Loves not love when it gets mixed up with irrelevant outside matters. Will you marry her? She herself is as valuable as any dowry could ever be.	Is it no more but thisa tardiness in nature Which often leaves the history unspoke That it intends to do?My lord of Burgundy, What say you to the lady? Loves not love When it is mingled with regards that stands Aloof from th' entire point. Will you have her? She is herself a dowry.
(to LEAR) King, just give me the dowry you promised me, and Ill make Cordelia the Duchess of Burgundy right away.	(to LEAR)Royal King, Give but that portion which yourself proposed, And here I take Cordelia by the hand, Duchess of Burgundy.
No, Ill give nothing. I wont budge on that.	Nothing. I have sworn. I am firm.
(to CORDELIA) In that case, Im sorry you have to lose me as a husband because you lost the king as a father.	(to CORDELIA) I am sorry then. You have so lost a father That you must lose a husband.
Peace to you, my lord of Burgundy. Since you love money and power so much, I wont be your wife.	Peace be with Burgundy. Since that respects and fortunes are his love, I shall not be his wife.
Beautiful Cordelia, youre all the richer now that youre poor. Youre more valuable now that youre rejected and more loved now that youre hated. Ill take you and your wonderful virtues here and now, if its okay that Im picking up what others have thrown away. Its so strange that in neglecting you so cruelly, the gods have made me love you so dearly.King, the daughter youve rejected is now mine, as Queen of France. No Duke of spineless Burgundy can take this treasure of a girl from me now.Say goodbye to them, Cordelia, even though theyve been unkind to you. Youll find a much better place in France than what youre giving up here.	Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor, Most choice forsaken, and most loved despised! Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon, Be it lawful I take up whats cast away. Gods, gods! 'Tis strange that from their coldst neglect My love should kindle to inflamed respect. Thy dowerless daughter, King, thrown to my chance, Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France. Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy Can buy this unprized precious maid of me. Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind. Thou losest here, a better where to find.
Shes yours, King of France. Take her. Shes no longer my daughter, and Ill never see her face again. (to CORDELIA) So get out of here. Leave without any blessing or love from me.Come with me, Burgundy.	Thou hast her, France. Let her be thine, for we Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see That face of hers again. (to CORDELIA) Therefore be gone Without our grace, our love, our benison. Come, noble Burgundy.
Say goodbye to your sisters.	Bid farewell to your sisters.
Sisters, you whom our father loves so dearly, I leave you now with tears in my eyes. I know you for what you really are, but as your sister Im reluctant to criticize you. Take good care of our father and show him the love that you have professed. I leave him in your carebut oh, if only I were still in his favor I could arrange for better care for him. Goodbye to you both.	The jewels of our father, with washed eyes Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are, And like a sister am most loath to call Your faults as they are named. Love well our father. To your professd bosoms I commit him. But yet, alas, stood I within his grace, I would prefer him to a better place. So farewell to you both.
Dont tell us what our duty is.	Prescribe not us our duty.
You should focus instead on pleasing your husband, whos taken you in as an act of charity. Youve failed to obey your father and you deserve to be deprived of everything thats been taken away from you.	Let your study Be to content your lord, who hath received you At fortunes alms. You have obedience scanted, And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
Time will tell what youve got up your sleeve. You can be deceitful in the short term, but eventually truth will come out. Have a good life.	Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides, Who covers faults at last with shame derides. Well may you prosper.
Come with me, my dear Cordelia.	Come, my fair Cordelia.
Sister, I have a lot to say about things that concern us both. I think that our father will leave here tonight.	Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what most nearlyappertains to us both. I think our father will hence tonight.
Yes, Im sure he willto stay with you. Next month hell stay with us.	Thats most certain, and with you. Next month with us.
Hes so flighty in his old age, as we keep noticing. He has always loved Cordelia best, and his bad judgment in disowning her now is obvious.	You see how full of changes his age is. The observation wehave made of it hath not been little. He always loved oursister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now casther off appears too grossly.
Hes going senile. But then again hes never really understood his own feelings very well.	'Tis the infirmity of his age. Yet he hath ever but slenderlyknown himself.
Yes, he was hotheaded even in the prime of his life. Now that hes old, we can expect to have to deal not only with his old character flaws, which have turned into deep-rooted habits, but also with the uncontrollable crabbiness that comes with old age.	The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash. Thenmust we look from his age to receive not alone theimperfections of long-engrafted condition, but therewithalthe unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric yearsbring with them.
Well probably witness many more outbursts from him, like banishing Kent.	Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as thisof Kents banishment.
Theres still the King of Frances farewell ceremony. Lets put our heads together. If our father continues to use his authority as usual, then his recent abdication of the kingdom will just hurt us.	There is further compliment of leave-taking betweenFrance and him. Pray you, lets sit together. If our fathercarry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this lastsurrender of his will but offend us.
Well have to think about it carefully.	We shall further think on t.
We have to strike while the irons hot.	We must do something, and i' th' heat.
I only worship whats natural, not whats manmade. Why should I let myself be tortured by manmade social customs that deprive me of my rights simply because I was born twelve or fourteen months later than my older brother? Why do they call me bastard and lowlife when Im just as gifted in mind and body as legitimate children? Why do they call us bastards lowlifes? Always lowlife, bastard, lowlife, lowlife. At least we bastards were conceived in a moment of passionate lust rather than in a dull, tired marriage bed, where half-sleeping parents monotonously churn out a bunch of sissy kids. All right then, legitimate brother Edgar, I have to have your lands. Our father loves me just as much as the legitimate Edgar. What a nice word that is, legitimate! Well, my legitimate Edgar, if this letter works and my plan succeeds, Edmund the lowlife will beat the legitimate. Look out, Im on my way up. Three cheers for bastards!	Thou, nature, art my goddess. To thy law My services are bound. Wherefore should I Stand in the plague of custom and permit The curiosity of nations to deprive me For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines Lag of a brother? Why bastard? Wherefore base? When my dimensions are as well compact, My mind as generous, and my shape as true As honest madams issue? Why brand they us With base, with baseness, bastardy, base, base Who in the lusty stealth of nature take More composition and fierce quality Than doth within a dull, stale, tird bed Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops Got tween a sleep and wake? Well then, Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land. Our fathers love is to the bastard Edmund As to the legitimate.Fine word, legitimate! Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed And my invention thrive, Edmund the base Shall top th' legitimate. I grow, I prosper. Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
Kents been banished just like that? And the King of France gone in a huff? And King Lears abdicated his authority, making his kingship a ceremonial title only? All this so suddenly?Edmund, whats going on? Whats the news?	Kent banished thus? And France in choler parted? And the king gone tonight, prescribed his power Confined to exhibition? All this done Upon the gad?Edmund, how now? What news?
Did my father hit one of my attendants for scolding his fool?	Did my father strike my gentleman For chiding of his fool?
Yes, ma'am.	Ay, madam.
He constantly offends me. Every hour he comes out with some horrible new offense that puts us all on edge. I wont stand for it. His knights are getting out of control, and he himself reprimands us about every little detail. When he comes back from hunting, Im not going to speak to him. Tell him Im sick. And if youre not as attentive in serving him as you used to be, thatll be good. Ill take responsibility for it.	By day and night he wrongs me. Every hour He flashes into one gross crime or other That sets us all at odds. Ill not endure it. His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us On every trifle. When he returns from hunting, I will not speak with him. Say I am sick. If you come slack of former services, You shall do well. The fault of it Ill answer.
Hes coming, ma'am. I hear him.	Hes coming, madam. I hear him.
Be as lazy and neglectful as you like around himyou and the other servants. I want it to become an issue. If he doesnt like it, he can go live with my sister. I know she feels the same way about him that I do, and shell stand her ground. That useless old man still thinks he can wield all the powers hes given away. I swear, old fools become like babies again. You cant just flatter them; you also have to discipline them when you see that theyre misguided. Remember what Ive told you.	Put on what weary negligence you please, You and your fellow servants. Ill have it come to question. If he distaste it, let him to our sister, Whose mind and mine I know in that are one, Not to be overruled. Idle old man That still would manage those authorities That he hath given away! Now by my life, Old fools are babes again and must be used With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused. Remember what I have said.
Very well, ma'am.	Very well, madam.
If I can disguise my voice as well as my appearance, then Ill be able to carry out my plan perfectly. I was banished, but hopefully I can serve the very king who condemned me. I love my master, and hell find me very hard-working.	If but as well I other accents borrow, That can my speech diffuse, my good intent May carry through itself to that full issue For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent, If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned, So may it come thy master, whom thou lovest, Shall find thee full of labors.
Dont make me wait for dinner even a moment. Get it ready immediately.	Let me not stay a jot for dinner. Go get it ready.
	
A man, sir.	A man, sir.
Whats your profession? What do you want from me?	What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?
IKent interprets your profession as your declaration rather than your job.I profess that Im as good as I seemIll faithfully serve a master who trusts me, love those who are honest, talk with those who are wise and dont talk too much. Im God-fearing, I fight if I must, and I dont eat fish.	I do profess to be no less than I seemto serve him trulythat will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, toconverse with him that is wise and says little, to fearjudgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
But who are you?	What art thou?
An honest guy whos as poor as the king.	A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.
If youre as poor a subject as he is a king, you definitely are poor. What do you want?	If thou beest as poor for a subject as hes for a king, thou'rtpoor enough. What wouldst thou?
(to KENT, giving him letters) Go ahead of us and deliver these letters to the Earl of Gloucester. Answer my daughters questions about the letter, but dont tell her anything else you know. If youre not quick enough, Ill get there before you.	(to KENT, giving him letters) Go you before to Gloucesterwith these letters. Acquaint my daughter no further withanything you know than comes from her demand out of theletter. If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there aforeyou.
I wont sleep until Ive delivered your letter, my lord.	I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.
If a mans brain were in his feet, wouldnt it be susceptible to frostbite?	If a mans brains were in s heels, were t not in danger ofkibes?
Yes, boy.	Ay, boy.
In that case, cheer up. Your brains wont need slippers to protect them from frostbite, since your brains arent in your feetif they were you wouldnt take this useless journey to see Regan.	Then, I prithee, be merry. Thy wit shall ne'er go slipshod.
Ha, ha, ha!	Ha, ha, ha!
Your other daughter Regan will treat you kindly, youll see. Even though shes as similar to Goneril as one crabapple is like another, still I know what I know.	Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly. Forthough shes as like this as a crabs like an apple, yet I can tellwhat I can tell.
And what do you know, boy?	Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?
I know that Regan will taste just like Gonerilboth of them sour crabapples. Do you know why the nose is in the middle of a persons face?	She will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou cansttell why ones nose stands i' th' middle on s face?
Hello, Curan.	Save thee, Curan.
Hello, sir. I just saw your father the Lord Gloucester and notified him that the Duke of Cornwall and his wife Regan will stay with him here tonight.	And you, sir. I have been with your father and given himnotice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his duchesswill be here with him this night.
Why is that?	How comes that?
I dont know. Have you heard the latest news?I mean the whispered rumors, since thats all they are at this point.	Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad?I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but ear-kissingarguments.
No, I havent. Whats going on?	Not I. Pray you, what are they?
You havent heard of the war brewing between the Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?	Have you heard of no likely wars toward twixt the two Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?
Not a word.	Not a word.
You may hear about it soon. Goodbye, sir.	You may do then in time. Fare you well, sir.
The duke will be here tonight? All the betterin fact its the best that could happen. His arrival fits perfectly into my plan. My fathers ready to arrest my brother, and I have one risky thing to do. Fast work and a little luck are all I need.Brother, could I have a word with you? Come down, brother.	The duke be here tonight? The betterbest! This weaves itself perforce into my business. My father hath set guard to take my brother. And I have one thing, of a queasy question, Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work! Brother, a word. Descend, brother, I say.
Good morning to you, friend. Do you work in this house?	Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
Yes, I do.	Ay.
Where should we stable our horses?	Where may we set our horses?
In the mud.	I' th' mire.
Please, sir, be kind to me and tell me.	Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.
I wont be kind to you.	I love thee not.
In that case, I dont much care for you either.	Why, then, I care not for thee.
If I could get my hands on you, Id make you care.	If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee carefor me.
Why are you talking to me like this? I dont even know you.	Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
Ah, but I know you.	Fellow, I know thee.
Who am I then?	What dost thou know me for?
Youre a lowlife, a rascal who eats leftover scraps. Youre an ignoble, arrogant, shallow, vulgar, pretentious, conceited, filthy third-rate servant who thinks hes something special. Youre a cowardly lawyer-loving bastard; a vain, brown-nosing, prissy scoundrel whod pimp himself out to advance his career; a bag lady. Youre nothing but a lowlife, a beggar, a coward, and a pimp, the son and heir of a mutt bitch. Ill beat you until you whine and cry if you deny the least bit of this.	A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking knave;a whoreson, glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue;one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd inway of good service; and art nothing but the composition ofa knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of amongrel bitch; one whom I will beat into clamorous whiningif thou deniest the least syllable of thy addition.
I heard myself declared an outlaw and escaped capture by hiding in the trunk of a hollow tree. Every town and port is crawling with henchmen on the lookout, waiting to capture me. But Ill survive while I can. Ive decided to disguise myself as the lowliest and rattiest beggar that mankind has ever seen. Ill smear my face with filth, put on a loincloth, make my hair matted and tangled, and face the bad weather wearing almost nothing. Ive seen beggars out of insane asylums who stick pins and nails into their numb arms. They pray or roar lunatic curses, horrifying farmers and villagers into giving them alms. Poor crazy Tom! they call themselves. Well, at least thats something. As Edgar, Im nothing at all.	I heard myself proclaimed, And by the happy hollow of a tree Escaped the hunt. No port is free, no place That guard and most unusual vigilance Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may scape, I will preserve myself, and am bethought To take the basest and most poorest shape That ever penury in contempt of man Brought near to beast. My face Ill grime with filth, Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots, And with presented nakedness outface The winds and persecutions of the sky. The country gives me proof and precedent Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices Strike in their numbed and mortified bare arms Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary, And with this horrible object from low farms, Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills, Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers, Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! Poor Tom! Thats something yet. Edgar I nothing am.
Its strange that Regan and her husband left their house without sending back my messenger.	'Tis strange that they should so depart from home, And not send back my messenger.
According to what I heard, they had no travel plans as of last night.	As I learned, The night before there was no purpose in them Of this remove.
(to LEAR) Hail, noble master!	(to LEAR) Hail to thee, noble master!
Whats this? Are you sitting around in this humiliation to amuse yourself?	Ha! Makest thou this shame thy pastime?
No, my lord.	No, my lord.
Ha, ha! Thats a nasty garter belt. You tie up horses by their heads, dogs and bears by their necks, monkeys by their waists, and humans by their legs. When a persons prone to wanderlust, he has to wear wooden socks, like a chastity belt around his ankles.	Ha, ha! Look, he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by theheads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by the loins,and men by the legs. When a mans overlusty at legs, thenhe wears wooden nether-stocks.
(to KENT) Who could have misunderstood your assigment so completely as to lock you up like this?	(to KENT) Whats he that hath so much thy place mistook To set thee here?
Your daughter and son-in-law.	It is both he and she: Your son and daughter.
No.	No.
Yes.	Yes.
Im telling you No.	No, I say.
And Im telling you Yes.	I say Yea.
Whos there, aside from this foul weather?	Whos there, besides foul weather?
Someone whose mood is as foul as the weather, very troubled.	One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
I know you. Wheres the king?	I know you. Wheres the king?
Struggling with the wind and rain. Hes shouting at the wind to blow the earth into the sea, or make the sea flood the earthhe wants to see the world return to primal chaos. He keeps tearing out his white hair, which the blindly raging winds catch up and blow away into nothingness. Small but brave in his surroundings, hes trying to stand up against the wind and rain blowing back and forth. Hes running bareheaded, calling for the end of the world, out there on a night like this, when even savage animals ravenous with hunger crawl under cover and hide.	Contending with the fretful elements. Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea Or swell the curld water 'bove the main, That things might change or cease. Tears his white hair, Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage, Catch in their fury and make nothing of. Strives in his little world of man to outscorn The to-and-froconflicting wind and rain. This nightwherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, The lion and the belly-pinchd wolf Keep their fur dryunbonneted he runs, And bids what will take all.
But whos with him?	But who is with him?
Nobody but the fool, whos trying to soothe the wounds in the kings heart with jokes.	None but the fool, who labors to outjest His heart-struck injuries.
Blow, winds! Blow until your cheeks crack! Rage on, blow! Let tornadoes spew water until the steeples of our churches and the weathervanes are all drowned. Let quick sulfurous lightning, strong enough to split enormous trees, singe the white hair on my head. Let thunder flatten the spherical world, crack open all the molds from which nature forms human beings, and spill all the seeds from which ungrateful humans grow!	Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage, blow! You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout Till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the cocks! You sulfurous and thought-executing fires, Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts, Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder, Smite flat the thick rotundity o' th' world, Crack natures molds, all germens spill at once That make ingrateful man!
Oh, uncle, its better to smile and flatter indoors where its dry than get soaked out here. Please, uncle, lets go in and ask your daughters to forgive you. This storm has no pity for either wise men or fools.	O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than thisrainwater out o' door. Good nuncle, in, and ask thydaughters blessing. Heres a night pities neither wise mannor fool.
Let thunder rumble! Let lightning spit fire! Let the rain spray! The rain, the wind, the thunder and lightning are not my daughters. Nature, I dont accuse your weather of unkindness. I never gave you a kingdom or raised you as my child, and you dont owe me any obedience. So go ahead and have your terrifying fun. Here I am, your slavea poor, sick, weak, hated old man. But I can still accuse you of kowtowing, taking my daughters' side against me, ancient as I am. Oh, its foul!	Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! Spout, rain! Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters. I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness. I never gave you kingdom, called you children. You owe me no subscription. Why then, let fall Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand, your slave A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man. But yet I call you servile ministers, That will with two pernicious daughters joined Your high engendered battles 'gainst a head So old and white as this. Oh, ho! 'Tis foul.
Anyone who has a house to cover his head has a good head on his shoulders. The guy who finds a place to put his penis Before he has a house of his own Will wind up dirt poor and covered with lice	He that has a house to put s head in has a good headpiece. The codpiece that will house
Oh, oh, Edmund, I dont like this monstrous business. When asked the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall if I could take pity on the king and shelter him from the storm, they took my house away from me and ordered me never to talk about him, lobby for him, or support him in any way.	Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing.When I desire their leave that I might pity him, they tookfrom me the use of mine own house, charged me on pain oftheir perpetual displeasure neither to speak of him, entreatfor him, nor any way sustain him.
Thats uncivilized and unnatural!	Most savage and unnatural!
Oh, be quiet. Theres a feud between the two dukes. And theres something even worse than that. I got a letter tonight. Its dangerous to talk about it. Ive locked it up in my room. The humiliation that the king is suffering now will be revenged thoroughly. Armed forces have already landed. We have to take the kings side. Ill look for him and secretly help him. You go and talk to the duke so he wont notice Im helping the king. If he asks to see me, tell him Im sick and went to bed. Even if I have to dieas they threatenI have to help the king. Strange things are about to happen, Edmund. Please be careful.	Go to, say you nothing. Theres a division betwixt thedukes. And a worse matter than that: I have received a letterthis night. 'Tis dangerous to be spoken. I have locked theletter in my closet. These injuries the king now bears will berevenged home. Theres part of a power already footed. Wemust incline to the king. I will look him and privily relievehim. Go you and maintain talk with the duke, that mycharity be not of him perceived. If he ask for me, I am ill andgone to bed. Though I die for itas no less is threatenedmethe king my old master must be relieved. There issome strange thing toward, Edmund. Pray you, be careful.
Ill tell the duke right away that youre going to see the king, which is forbidden. And Ill tell him about the letter too. Youll get what you deserve, and Ill be rewarded with everything you losein other words, all your lands. The young generation rises while the old one falls.	This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke Instantly know, and of that letter too. This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me That which my father losesno less than all. The younger rises when the old doth fall.
Heres the hut, my lord. Please go inside. The nights too rough for humans to bear.	Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter. The tyranny of the open nights too rough For nature to endure.
Leave me for a bit.	Let me alone.
My lord, here is the entrance.	Good my lord, enter here.
Will you break my heart?	Wilt break my heart?
Id rather break my own heart. Now please go in.	I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
You think its a big deal that this fierce storm is soaking me to the skin. Its a big deal to you. But whenever you feel a larger pain, the smaller one disappears. You would run away from a bear, but if the only way to run was into the stormy ocean, youd turn around and confront the bear. When your mind is at peace, your body is sensitive to the elements. But this storm in my mind keeps me from feeling anything except whats tormenting mehow ungrateful my children are! Isnt their ingratitude like the mouth biting the hand that feeds it? But Ill punish them thoroughly. No, I wont cry any more. Imagine them locking me out on a night like this! But let it rain; Ill survive. On a night like this! Oh, Regan, Goneril, your kind old father whose generous heart gave you everythingOh, if I think about that Ill go mad. I want to avoid that. No more of these thoughts.	Thou thinkst tis much that this contentious storm Invades us to the skin. So tis to thee. But where the greater malady is fixed The lesser is scarce felt. Thoudst shun a bear, But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea Thoudst meet the bear i' th' mouth. When the minds free, The bodys delicate. The tempest in my mind Doth from my senses take all feeling else Save what beats therefilial ingratitude. Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand For lifting food to t? But I will punish home. No, I will weep no more. In such a night To shut me out! Pour on, I will endure. In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril, Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all Oh, that way madness lies. Let me shun that. No more of that.
Ill get my revenge before I leave this house.	I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
Im afraid to think how Ill be criticized for letting my natural affection for my father give way to my loyalty to you.	How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus givesway to loyalty, something fears me to think of.
Now I realize your brother tried to kill your father not just because your brother is an evil man, but because your father deserved it by being wicked himself.	I now perceive it was not altogether your brothers evildisposition made him seek his death, but a provoking meritset awork by a reprovable badness in himself.
How unlucky am I, having to apologize for doing the right thing! (giving CORNWALL a letter) This is the letter he was talking about, and it confirms he was a spy for France. Oh God, I wish he had never betrayed us, or that I hadnt been the one to discover his treason.	How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just!(giving CORNWALL a letter) This is the letter which he spokeof, which approves him an intelligent party to theadvantages of France. O heavens, that this treason werenot, or not I the detector!
Come with me to see the duchess.	Go with me to the duchess.
If this letters right, youve got a lot to deal with.	If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mightybusiness in hand.
Right or not, its made you the Earl of Gloucester. Go find your father and let him know were going to arrest him.	True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester. Seek outwhere thy father is, that he may be ready for ourapprehension.
(to himself) If I catch my father helping the king, hell seem even more guily. (to CORNWALL) Ill do what I must loyally, even though it pains me to take action against my father.	(aside) If I find him comforting the king, it will stuff hissuspicion more fully.(to CORNWALL)I will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflictbe sore between that and my blood.
I put my trust in you. Youll see that Im a better father to you than Gloucester.	I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer fatherin my love.
Its better here than outside. Be happy about it. Ill do what I can to make you even more comfortable. I wont be gone long.	Here is better than the open air. Take it thankfully. I willpiece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not belong from you.
He cant bear his grief and so hes losing his mind. May God reward you for your kindness!	All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience. The gods reward your kindness!
The devil Frateretto is telling me that the diabolical Roman emperor NeroNero was a first-century A.D. Roman emperor who, according to legend, played the fiddle while Rome burned.Nero likes to go fishing in hell. Pray to the gods, you fool, and beware the foul devil.	Frateretto calls me and tells me Nero is an angler in the lakeof darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
Heres a riddle, uncle. Is the lunatic a gentleman or an ordinary guy?	Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentlemanor a yeoman?
Hes a king, a king!	A king, a king!
No, hes an ordinary guy who s got a gentleman for a son, since someone would have to be crazy to let his son become a gentleman before hes achieved that distinction himself.	No, hes a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son, for hesa mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.
I see Regan and Goneril in hellA thousand hissing devils with sizzling red pitchforks come up to them!	To have a thousand with red burning spits Come hissing in upon 'em!
The nasty devils biting my butt.	The foul fiend bites my back.
(to GONERIL) Hurry to your husband. Show him this letter. The French army has landed.Find the traitor Gloucester.	(to GONERIL) Post speedily to my lord your husband. Showhim this letter. The army of France is landed.Seek out the traitor Gloucester.
Hang him immediately.	Hang him instantly.
Gouge out his eyes!	Pluck out his eyes.
Leave him to my wrath.Edmund, go with my sister-in-law. You shouldnt have to see the punishment we inflict on your father. Tell the Duke of Albany to prepare for war immediately. We will do the same. Well keep the lines of communication open between us. (to GONERIL) Goodbye, my dear sister-in-law. (to EDMUND) Goodbye, lord Gloucester.	Leave him to my displeasure.Edmund, keep you oursister company. The revenges we are bound to take uponyour traitorous father are not fit for your beholding. Advisethe duke where you are going, to a most festinatepreparation. We are bound to the like. Our posts shall beswift and intelligent betwixt us.Farewell, dear sister.(to EDMUND) Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.
	
Lord Gloucester has helped him leave. Thirty-five or thirty-six of his knights met him at the gate, and together with some others theyve set off for Dover, where they claim to have powerful friends.	My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence. Some five or six and thirty of his knights, Hot questrists after him, met him at gate, Who with some other of the lords dependants Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast To have well-armd friends.
Still, Im better off now, as a beggar who is openly hated, than when I was flattered to my face hated in secret. The lowliest and most dejected creatures live without fear and still harbor hope. The worst kind of change is when good fortune turns sour. At the bottom, any change is for the better. So I welcome this wind freely. Ive sunk as far down as I can go, so Ive got nothing more to fear from the weather.	Yet better thus, and known to be contemned, Than still contemned and flattered. To be worst, The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear. The lamentable change is from the best; The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then, Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace! The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst Owes nothing to thy blasts.
	My father, poorly led? World, world, O world! But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee, Life would not yield to age.
(to GLOUCESTER) My good lord, Ive rented land from you and your father for eighty years.	(to GLOUCESTER)O my good lord, I have been your tenant and your fathers tenantthese fourscore years.
Away, get out of here. Leave me, my friend. Theres nothing you can do to help me now, and being with me puts your life in danger.	Away, get thee away. Good friend, be gone. Thy comforts can do me no good at all. Thee they may hurt.
But you cant see where youre going, sir.	Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.
I dont have anywhere to go, so I dont need to see. When I could see, I didnt always see clearly. I made	I have no way, and therefore want no eyes.
Welcome, my lord. Im surprised my bland husband didnt meet me on the way here.	Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband Not met us on the way.
	
Hes inside, ma'am, but he has changed dramatically since you last saw him. When I told him that the invading army has landed, he just smiled at me. When I told him you were on your way, he replied, Too bad. When I told him about Gloucesters betrayal and his son Edmunds loyal service, he called me an idiot and said I had it all wrong. He was delighted by the bad news and disgusted by the good news.	Madam, withinbut never man so changed. I told him of the army that was landed. He smiled at it. I told him you were coming. His answer was The worse. Of Gloucesters treachery And of the loyal service of his son, When I informed him, then he called me sot, And told me I had turned the wrong side out. What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him; What like, offensive.
(to EDMUND) Then dont come in with me. Hes a coward and cant commit himself to doing anything risky. He chooses not to be insulted rather than challenge those who offend him. But what we talked about with longing on the way may soon come true. EdmundGoneril may be referring to the beginnings of a romance between her and Edmund.Edmund, go back to see my brother-in-law. Gather his soldiers and organize his troops. I plan to take charge of my household. From now on I will wear the pants, and my husband can play the housewife. We can trust Oswald to carry messages between us. If you act boldly, you will soon obey me as your true mistress. Take this as a token of my esteem. Dont speak. Lean down. This kiss should encourage you. (she kissesEDMUNDGonerils words suggest both that she will take charge and that she will become Edmunds lover. In many productions, Goneril gives Edmund a chain that she puts around his neck.EDMUND) I hope you understand me. Goodbye, and good luck.	(to EDMUND) Then shall you go no further. It is the cowish terror of his spirit That dares not undertake. Hell not feel wrongs Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother. Hasten his musters and conduct his powers. I must change names at home, and give the distaff Into my husbands hands. This trusty servant Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear If you dare venture in your own behalf A mistresss command. Wear this. Spare speech. Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak, Would stretch thy spirits up into the air. (kisses EDMUND) Conceive, and fare thee well.
Do you know why the King of France suddenly went back home?	Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know youthe reason?
Hed left some unfinished business, which he remembered after arriving here. It was urgent and important enough to require his personal presence.	Something he left imperfect in the state which, since hiscoming forth, is thought of; which imports to the kingdomso much fear and danger that his personal return was mostrequired and necessary.
Whom did he leave in charge here?	Who hath he left behind him general?
The marshal of France, Monsieur la Far.	The Marshal of France, Monsieur la Far.
Was Queen Cordelia aggrieved by the letters you delivered?	Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration ofgrief?
Yes, sir. She took the letters and read them in front of me. Now and then a large tear trickled down her delicate cheek. She seemed to be trying to control her emotions, which were overwhelming her.	Ay, sir. She took them, read them in my presence, And now and then an ample tear trilled down Her delicate cheek. It seemed she was a queen Over her passion, who, most rebel-like, Sought to be king o'er her.
So she was moved by it?	O, then it moved her?
There were no outbursts. She was struggling between emotion and self-control. Youve seen how it can rain while the sun shines? Thats how she was, smiling and crying at once, only more lovely. The little smile on her full lips didnt seem aware of the tears that were dropping like diamonds from her pearly eyes. If everyone looked so lovely in their sorrow, then sorrow would be highly prized.	Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove Who should express her goodliest. You have seen Sunshine and rain at onceher smiles and tears Were like a better way. Those happy smilets That played on her ripe lip seemed not to know What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence As pearls from diamonds dropped. In brief, Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved If all could so become it.
Sadly, its the king thats missing. They saw him just now as mad and deranged as the stormy sea, singing loudly, wearing a crown of nettles, thorns, hemlock, and all the other weeds that grow in our cornfields.Send out a hundred soldiers to find him. Search high and low, in every acre of the fields, and bring him here for me to see him.	Alack, tis he. Why, he was met even now As mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud, Crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds, With burdocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers, Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow In our sustaining corn.A century send forth. Search every acre in the high-grown field, And bring him to our eye.
	In the restoring his bereavd sense? He that helps him take all my outward worth.
There is a way, ma'am. Nature heals people with rest, which Lear hasnt had. But there are many herbs that will help him rest and take his mind off his anguish for a while.	There is means, madam. Our foster nurse of nature is repose, The which he lacksthat to provoke in him Are many simples operative, whose power Will close the eye of anguish.
Then Ill water all those precious herbs with my tears to make them grow. May they relieve a sick old mans suffering. Go find those herbs for him, before his madness puts his life in danger.	All blessed secrets, All you unpublished virtues of the earth, Spring with my tears. Be aidant and remediate In the good mans distress. Seek, seek for him, Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life That wants the means to lead it.
I have news, ma'am. The British forces are on their way here.	News, madam. The British powers are marching hitherward.
Have my brother-in-laws troops been mobilized?	But are my brothers powers set forth?
Yes, ma'am.	Ay, madam.
Is he there in person?	Himself in person there?
Yes, making a big fuss. Your sisters the better soldier of the two.	Madam, with much ado. Your sister is the better soldier.
Lord Edmund didnt speak to your master at home?	Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
No, ma'am.	No, madam.
What could my sisters letter to him say?	What might import my sisters letter to him?
I dont know, ma'am.	I know not, lady.
He rushed away on serious business. It was a huge mistake to let old Gloucester live after we blinded him. Wherever he goes, he inspires compassion and people turn against us. I think Edmund went off to kill him, to put him out of his blind misery. And also to find out the size of the enemy army.	Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter. It was great ignorance, Gloucesters eyes being out, To let him live. Where he arrives he moves All hearts against us. Edmund I think is gone In pity of his misery to dispatch His nighted life; moreover to descry The strength o' th' enemy.
I have to follow him and give him the letter.	I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
Our troops are deployed tomorrow. Stay with us tonight. Its dangerous out there.	Our troops set forth tomorrow. Stay with us. The ways are dangerous.
When will we get to the top of that cliff?	When shall we come to th' top of that same hill?
Were walking up to the top right now. See how hard it is to climb?	You do climb up it now. Look how we labor.
The ground feels flat to me.	Methinks the ground is even.
No, its dreadfully steep. Listen. Do you hear the sea?	Horrible steep. Hark, do you hear the sea?
No, really, I dont.	No, truly.
Then your other senses must be getting worse because of the trauma of blindness.	Why then, your other senses grow imperfect By your eyes' anguish.
It may be so. It seems to me that your voice has changed, and that your speech is more elegant than it used to be.	So may it be indeed. Methinks thy voice is altered, and thou speakst In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
Youre mistaken about all that. The only thing different about me is my clothes.	Youre much deceived. In nothing am I changed But in my garments.
I think youre more articulate.	Methinks youre better spoken.
Come on, sir. This is the place. Stand still. Its so scary to look down! It makes me dizzy. The crows flying down below look as small as ants. Halfway down the cliff theres somebody clinging to the rock and gathering wild herbsa risky business! He looks like a dot to me. The fishermen walking along the beach are as small as mice. That big ship over there looks no bigger	Come on, sir. Heres the place. Stand still. How fearful And dizzy tis to cast ones eyes so low! The crows and choughs that wing the midway air Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down Hangs one that gathers samphiredreadful trade! Methinks he seems no bigger than his head. The fishermen that walk upon the beach Appear like mice. And yon tall anchoring bark,
Oh, Kent, what could I ever do to become as good as you are? I wont live long enough, and all my efforts will fail me.	O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work To match thy goodness? My life will be too short, And every measure fail me.
Just being thanked is more than enough for me, madam. I hope all reports about me simply tell the truth, no more or less.	To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid. All my reports go with the modest truth, Nor more, nor clipped, but so.
Change into better clothes. These rags will just remind us of those bad times when you had to wear a disguise. Please take them off.	Be better suited. These weeds are memories of those worser hours. I prithee, put them off.
Im sorry, madam, but I cant do that yet. If people recognize me now, I wont be able to carry out my plans. I have to ask you, as a favor, not to let on that you recognize me until the time is right.	Pardon, dear madam. Yet to be known shortens my made intent. My boon I make it that you know me not Till time and I think meet.
All right, my lord.Hows the king doing?	Then be t so, my good lord. How does the king?
Hes still sleeping, ma'am.	Madam, sleeps still.
Kind gods, heal the wounds that hes wrongly suffered! Restore the sanity of this father whose children have driven him mad and changed him into a child again!	O you kind gods, Cure this great breach in his abusd nature, Th' untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up, Of this child-changd father!
Would you mind if we woke up the king? Hes slept a long time.	So please your majesty That we may wake the king? He hath slept long.
(to a gentleman) Go find out from the Duke of Albany if his decision still holds, or if hes changed his mind. Hes always going back and forth and second-guessing himself. Come back and tell me what his final decision is.	(to a gentleman) Know of the duke if his last purpose hold, Or whether since he is advised by aught To change the course. Hes full of alteration And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.
My sisters servant Oswald has certainly run into trouble.	Our sisters man is certainly miscarried.
Im afraid that may be the case, madam.	'Tis to be doubted, madam.
Now, my sweet lord, you know how much I like you. Tell me truthfully, do you love my sister?	Now, sweet lord, You know the goodness I intend upon you. Tell me but trulybut then speak the truth Do you not love my sister?
Yes, truly and honorably.	In honored love.
But have you ever gone in my brother-in-laws bed and had sex with her?	But have you never found my brothers way To the forfended place?
No. You dishonor yourself and our relationship by thinking that.	That thought abuses you.
Im just worried that youve been cozying up to her, and gotten intimate with her.	I am doubtful that you have been conjunct And bosomed with her as far as we call hers.
No, I swear on my honor, I havent, madam.	No, by mine honor, madam.
Here, father, rest awhile in the shade of this tree. Say a little prayer for our side in battle. If I ever come back, Ill bring you good news.	Here, father, take the shadow of this tree For your good host. Pray that the right may thrive. If ever I return to you again, Ill bring you comfort.
Good luck, sir.	Grace go with you, sir.
We have to get out of here, old man. Let me help you up. Lets go! King Lears been defeated. He and his daughter are captured. Give me your hand. Come on.	Away, old man. Give me thy hand. Away! King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en. Give me thy hand. Come on.
I cant go any further, sir. This is as good a place as any to die.	No further, sir. A man may rot even here.
Are you depressed again? You cant choose your time of death any more than your time of birth. We live and die when our time comes. Come on.	What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure Their going hence even as their coming hither. Ripeness is all. Come on.
And thats true too.	And thats true too.
Officers, take them away. Guard them carefully until we decide how to punish them.	Some officers take them away. Good guard Until their greater pleasures first be known That are to censure them.
(to LEAR) At least were not the first ones in our position. The road to hell is paved with good intentions. But Im worried about you, my poor King. If it were only me, I would just wait out my bad luck. Should we meet with my sisters?	(to LEAR) We are not the first Who with best meaning have incurred the worst. For thee, oppressd King, I am cast down. Myself could else outfrown false fortunes frown. Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
No, no, no, no! Come on, lets go to prison. The two of us together will sing like birds in a cage. We will be good to each other. When you ask for my blessing, Ill get down on my knees and ask you to forgive me. Thats how well livewell pray, well sing, well tell old stories, well laugh at pretentious courtiers, well listen to nasty court gossip, well find out whos losing and whos winning, whos in and whos out. Well think about the mysteries of the universe as if we were Gods spies. In prison well outlast hordes of rulers that will come and go as their fortunes change.	No, no, no, no! Come, lets away to prison. We two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage. When thou dost ask me blessing, Ill kneel down And ask of thee forgiveness. So well live, And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues Talk of court news, and well talk with them too Who loses and who wins, whos in, whos out And take upon s the mystery of things As if we were Gods spies. And well wear out In a walled prison packs and sects of great ones That ebb and flow by the moon.
Take them away.	Take them away.
My Cordelia, even the gods admire how much youve sacrificed for me. Have I hugged you yet? Anyone who wants to separate us will have to smoke us out of the cave of our togetherness like foxes. Wipe your eyes. 	Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia, The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee? He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes. 
When should the three of us meet again? Will it be in thunder, lightning, or rain?	When shall we three meet again? In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
Well meet when the noise of the battle is over, when one side has won and the other side has lost.	When the hurly-burlys done, When the battles lost and won.
That will happen before sunset.	That will be ere the set of sun.
Where should we meet?	Where the place?
Lets do it in the open field.	Upon the heath.
Well meet Macbeth there.	There to meet with Macbeth.
(calling to her cat) Im coming, Graymalkin!	I come, Graymalkin!
My toad, Paddock, calls me.	Paddock calls.
(to her spirit) Ill be right here!	Anon.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair. Lets fly away through the fog and filthy air.	Fair is foul, and foul is fair Hover through the fog and filthy air.
Who is this bloody man? Judging from his appearance, I bet he can tell us the latest news about the revolt.	What bloody man is that? He can report, As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt The newest state.
This is the brave sergeant who fought to keep me from being captured. Hail, brave friend! Tell the king what was happening in the battle when you left it.	This is the sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought 'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend! Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.
For a while you couldnt tell who would win. The armies were like two exhausted swimmers clinging to each other and struggling in the water, unable to move. The villainous rebel Macdonwald was supported by foot soldiers and horsemen from Ireland and the Hebrides, and Lady Luck was with him, smiling cruelly at his enemies as if she were his whore. But Luck and Macdonwald together werent strong enough. Brave Macbeth, laughing at Luck, chopped his way through to Macdonwald, who didnt even have time to say good-bye or shake hands before Macbeth split him open from his navel to his jawbone and stuck his head on our castle walls.	Doubtful it stood, As two spent swimmers that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon himfrom the Western Isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied, And fortune, on his damnd quarrel smiling, Showed like a rebels whore. But alls too weak, For brave Macbethwell he deserves that name Disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valors minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave; Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, Till he unseamed him from the nave to th' chops, And fixed his head upon our battlements.
My brave relative! What a worthy man!	O valiant cousin! Worthy gentleman!
Where have you been, sister?	Where hast thou been, sister?
Killing pigs.	Killing swine.
And you, sister?	Sister, where thou?
A sailors wife had chestnuts in her lap and munched away at them. Give me one, I said. Get away from me, witch! the fat woman cried. Her husband has sailed off to Aleppo as master of a ship called the Tiger. Ill sail there in a kitchen strainer, turn myself into a tailless rat, and do things to him	A sailors wife had chestnuts in her lap, And munched, and munched, and munched. Give me, quoth I. Aroint thee, witch! the rump-fed runnion cries. Her husbands to Aleppo gone, master o' th' Tiger; But in a sieve Ill thither sail, And like a rat without a tail, Ill do, Ill do, and Ill do.
Ill give you some wind to sail there.	Ill give thee a wind.
How nice of you!	Thou 'rt kind.
And I will give you some more.	And I another.
I already have control of all the other winds, along with the ports from which they blow and every direction on the sailors compass in which they can go. Ill drain the life out of him. He wont catch a wink of sleep, either at night or during the day. He will live as a cursed man. For eighty-one weeks he will waste away in agony.	I myself have all the other, And the very ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' th' shipmans card. Ill drain him dry as hay. Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his penthouse lid. He shall live a man forbid. Weary sev'nnights nine times nine Shall he dwindle, peak and pine.
Has the former thane of Cawdor been executed yet? Havent the people in charge of that come back?	Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not Those in commission yet returned?
My king, they havent come back yet. But I spoke with someone who saw Cawdor die, and he said that Cawdor openly confessed his treasons, begged your highnesss forgiveness, and repented deeply. He never did anything in his whole life that looked as good as the way he died. He died like someone who had practiced how to toss away his most cherished possession as if it were a worthless a piece of garbage.	My liege, They are not yet come back. But I have spoke With one that saw him die, who did report That very frankly he confessed his treasons, Implored your highness' pardon, and set forth A deep repentance. Nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it. He died As one that had been studied in his death To throw away the dearest thing he owed As twere a careless trifle.
Theres no way to read a mans mind by looking at his face. I trusted Cawdor completely.	Theres no art To find the minds construction in the face. He was a gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust.
	The sin of my ingratitude even now Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before That swiftest wing of recompense is slow To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved, That the proportion both of thanks and payment Might have been mine! Only I have left to say, More is thy due than more than all can pay.
The witches met me on the day of my victory in battle, and I have since learned that they have supernatural knowledge. When I tried desperately to question them further, they vanished into thin air. While I stood spellbound, messengers from the king arrived and greeted me as the thane of Cawdor, which is precisely how the weird sisters had saluted me before calling me the future king!' I thought I should tell you this news, my dearest partner in greatness, so that you could rejoice along with me about the greatness that is promised to us. Keep it secret, and farewell.	(reading) They met me in the day of success, and I have learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor,' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time with 'Hail, king that shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.
	What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' th' milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great, Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou'ldst have, great Glamis, That which cries, Thus thou must do, if thou have it, And that which rather thou dost fear to do, Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear And chastise with the valor of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round, Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem To have thee crowned withal.
This castle is in a pleasant place. The air is sweet and appeals to my refined senses.	This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself Unto our gentle senses.
The fact that this summer bird, the house martin, builds his nests here proves how inviting the breezes are. There isnt a single protrusion in the castle walls where these birds havent built their hanging nests to sleep and breed. Ive noticed that they always like to settle and mate where the air is the nicest.	This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heavens breath Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle. Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.
Look, here comes our honored hostess! Sometimes the love my subjects bring me is inconvenient, but I still accept it as love. In doing so, Im teaching you to thank me for the incovenience Im causing you by being here, because it comes from my love to you.	See, see, our honored hostess! The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.
Everything were doing for you, even if it were doubled and then doubled again, is nothing compared to the honors you have brought to our family. We gladly welcome you as our guests, with gratitude for both the honors youve given us before and the new honors youve just given us.	All our service, In every point twice done and then done double, Were poor and single business to contend Against those honors deep and broad wherewith Your majesty loads our house. For those of old, And the late dignities heaped up to them, We rest your hermits.
If this business would really be finished when I did the deed, then it would be best to get it over with quickly. If the assassination of the king could work like a net, sweeping up everything and preventing any consequences, then the murder would be the be-all and end-all of the whole affair, and I would gladly put my soul and the afterlife at risk to do it. But for crimes like these there are still punishments in this world. By committing violent crimes we only teach other people to commit violence, and the violence of our students will come back to plague us teachers. Justice, being equal to everyone, forces us to drink from the poisoned cup that we serve to others. The king trusts me in two ways. First of all, I am his kinsman and his subject, so I should always try to protect him. Second, I am his host, so I should be closing the door in his murderers face, not trying to murder him myself. Besides, Duncan has been such a humble leader, so free of corruption, that his virtuous legacy will speak for him when he dies, as if angels were playing trumpets against the injustice of his murder. Pity, like an innocent newborn baby, will ride the wind with winged angels on invisible horses through the air to spread news of the horrible deed to everyone everywhere. People will shed a flood of tears that will drown the wind like a horrible downpour of rain. I cant spur myself to action. The only thing motivating me is ambition, which makes people rush ahead of themselves toward disaster.	If it were done when tis done, then twere well It were done quickly. If the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, Wed jump the life to come. But in these cases We still have judgment here, that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return To plague th' inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice To our own lips. Hes here in double trust: First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked newborn babe, Striding the blast, or heavens cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on th' other.
Hows the night going, boy?	How goes the night, boy?
The moon has set. The clock hasnt struck yet.	The moon is down. I have not heard the clock.
The moon sets at twelve, right?	And she goes down at twelve.
I think its later than that, sir.	I take t tis later, sir.
Here, take my sword. The heavens are being stingy with their light. Take this, too. Im tired and feeling heavy, but I cant sleep. Merciful powers, keep away the nightmares that plague me when I rest!	Hold, take my sword. Theres husbandry in heaven; Their candles are all out. Take thee that too. A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursd thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose.
	
A friend.	A friend.
Youre not asleep yet, sir? The kings in bed. Hes been in an unusually good mood and has granted many gifts to your household and servants. This diamond is a present from him to your wife for her boundless hospitality. (he hands MACBETH a diamond)	What, sir, not yet at rest? The kings a-bed. He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up In measureless content.
Because we were unprepared for the kings visit, wewerent able to entertain him as well as we would have wanted to.	Being unprepared, Our will became the servant to defect, Which else should free have wrought.
The alcohol that got the servants drunk has made me bold. The same liquor that quenched their thirst has fired me up. Listen! Quiet! That was the owl that shrieked, with a scary good night like the bells they ring before they execute people. Macbeth must be killing the king right now. The doors to Duncans chamber are open, and the drunk servants make a mockery of their jobs by snoring instead of protecting the king. I put so many drugs in their drinks that you cant tell if theyre alive or dead.	That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold. What hath quenched them hath given me fire. Hark! Peace! It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman, Which gives the sternst good-night. He is about it. The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugged their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.
(from offstage) Whos there? What is it?	(within)Whos there? What, ho!
Oh no, Im afraid the servants woke up, and the murder didnt happen. For us to attempt murder and not succeed would ruin us. (She hears a noise.) Listen to that! I put the servants' daggers where Macbeth would find them. He couldnt have missed them. If Duncan hadnt reminded me of my father when I saw him sleeping, I would have killed him myself.	Alack, I am afraid they have awaked, And tis not done. Th' attempt and not the deed Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready; He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled My father as he slept, I had done t.
	
I have done the deed. Did you hear a noise?	I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. Didnt you say something?	I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. Did not you speak?
When?	When?
This is a lot of knocking! Come to think of it, if a man were in charge of opening the gates of hell to let people in, he would have to turn the key a lot.	Heres a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of hell-gate,he should have old turning the key.
	
	
	
I can remember the past seventy years pretty well, and in all that time I have seen dreadful hours and strange things. But last nights horrors make everything that came before seem like a joke.	Threescore and ten I can remember well, Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.
Ah yes, old man. You can see the skies. They look like theyre upset about what mankind has been doing, and theyre threatening the Earth with storms. The clock says its daytime, but dark night is strangling the sun. Is it because night is so strong, or because day is so weak, that darkness covers the earth when its supposed to be light?	Ha, good father, Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with mans act, Threatens his bloody stage. By th' clock tis day, And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp. Is t nights predominance or the days shame That darkness does the face of Earth entomb When living light should kiss it?
Its unnatural, just like the murder that has been committed. Last Tuesday a falcon was circling high in the sky, and it was caught and killed by an ordinary owl that usually goes after mice.	'Tis unnatural, Even like the deed thats done. On Tuesday last, A falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.
And something else strange happened. Duncans horses, which are beautiful and swift and the best of their breed, suddenly turned wild and broke out of their stalls. Refusing to be obedient as usual, they acted like they were at war with mankind.	And Duncans horsesa thing most strange and certain Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would Make war with mankind.
They say the horses ate each other.	'Tis said they eat each other.
I saw it with my own eyes. It was an amazing sight. Here comes the good Macduff.	They did so, to th' amazement of mine eyes That looked upon t. Here comes the good Macduff.
Now you have it all: youre the king, the thane of Cawdor, and the thane of Glamis, just like the weird women promised you. And I suspect you cheated to win these titles. But it was also prophesied that the crown would not go to your descendants, and that my sons and grandsons would be kings instead. If the witches tell the truthwhich they did about youmaybe what they said about me will come true too. But shhh! Ill shut up now.	Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and I fear Thou playedst most foully for t. Yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings. If there come truth from them As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.
(indicating BANQUO) Heres our most important guest.	Heres our chief guest.
If we forgot him, our big celebration wouldnt be complete, and that wouldnt be any good.	If he had been forgotten, It had been as a gap in our great feast, And all-thing unbecoming.
(to BANQUO) Tonight were having a ceremonial banquet, and I want you to be there.	Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir, And Ill request your presence.
Whatever your highness commands me to do, it is always my duty to do it.	Let your highness Command upon me, to the which my duties Are with a most indissoluble tie Forever knit.
Has Banquo left the court?	Is Banquo gone from court?
Yes, madam, but hell be back tonight.	Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
Go tell the king I want to talk to him for a few minutes.	Say to the king I would attend his leisure For a few words.
No problem, madam.	Madam, I will.
If you get what you want and youre still not happy, youve spent everything and gained nothing. Its better to be the person who gets murdered than to be the killer and be tormented with anxiety.	Naughts had, alls spent, Where our desire is got without content. 'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
	Of sorriest fancies your companions making, Using those thoughts which should indeed have died With them they think on? Things without all remedy Should be without regard. Whats done is done.
We have slashed the snake but not killed it. It will heal and be as good as new, and well be threatened by its fangs once again. But the universe can fall apart, and heaven and earth crumble, before Ill eat my meals in fear and spend my nights tossing and turning with these nightmares Ive been having. Id rather be dead than endure this endless mental torture and harrowing sleep deprivation. We killed those men and sent them to rest in peace so that we could gain our own peace. Duncan lies in his grave, through with lifes troubles, and hes sleeping well. We have already done the worst we can do to him with our treason. After that, nothing can hurt him furthernot weapons, poison, rebellion, invasion, or anything else.	We have scorched the snake, not killed it. Shell close and be herself whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth. But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave. After lifes fitful fever he sleeps well. Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing Can touch him further.
But who told you to come here and join us?	But who did bid thee join with us?
Macbeth.	Macbeth.
We can trust this guy. He was given exactly the same orders we were.	He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers Our offices and what we have to do To the direction just.
Then stay with us. Theres still a bit of daylight in the sky. Now all the late travellers are hurrying to reach their inns. Banquo is almost here.	Then stand with us. The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day. Now spurs the lated traveler apace To gain the timely inn, and near approaches The subject of our watch.
Listen! I hear horses.	Hark, I hear horses.
(from offstage) Hey, give us some light here!	(within) Give us a light there, ho!
That must be him. The rest of the kings guests are already inside.	Then tis he: the rest That are within the note of expectation Already are i' th' court.
You can hear his horses moving around as the servants take them to the stables.	His horses go about.
Its almost a mile to the palace gate, but Banquo, like everybody else, usually walks from here to the palace.	Almost a mile; but he does usually So all men dofrom hence to the palace gate Make it their walk.
You know your own ranks, so you know where to sit. Sit down. From the highest to the lowest of you, I bid you a hearty welcome.	You know your own degrees; sit down. At first And last, the hearty welcome.
Thanks to your majesty.	Thanks to your majesty.
I will walk around and mingle with all of you, playing the humble host. My wife will stay in her royal chair, but at the appropriate time I will have her welcome you all.	Ourself will mingle with society And play the humble host. Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time We will require her welcome.
Say welcome to all of our friends for me, sir, for in my heart they are all welcome.	Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends, For my heart speaks they are welcome.
And they respond to you with their hearts as well. The table is full on both sides. I will sit here in the middle. Be free and happy. Soon we will toast around the table.	See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks. Both sides are even. Here Ill sit i' th' midst. Be large in mirth. Anon well drink a measure The table round.
	
Then it must be Banquos.	'Tis Banquos then.
Id rather see his blood splattered on your face than flowing through his veins. Did you finish him off?	'Tis better thee without than he within. Is he dispatched?
Whats wrong, Hecate? You look angry.	Why, how now, Hecate! You look angerly.
Dont I have a reason to be angry, you disobedient hags? How dare you give Macbeth riddles and prophecies about his future without telling me? I am your boss and the source of your powers. I am the one who secretly decides what evil things happen, but you never called me to join in and show off my own powers. And whats worse, youve done all this for a man who behaves like a spoiled brat, angry and hateful. Like all spoiled sons, he chases after what he wants and doesnt care about you. But you can make it up to me. Go away now and in the morning meet me in the pit by the river in hell. Macbeth will go there to learn his destiny. You bring your cauldrons, your spells, your charms, and everything else. Im about to fly away. Ill spend tonight working to make something horrible happen. I have a lot to do before noon. An important droplet is hanging from the corner of the moon. Ill catch it before it falls to the ground. When I work it over with magic spells, the drop will produce magical spirits that will trick Macbeth with illusions.	Have I not reason, beldams as you are? Saucy and overbold, how did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth In riddles and affairs of death, And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never called to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art? And, which is worse, all you have done Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you. But make amends now. Get you gone, And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i' th' morning. Thither he Will come to know his destiny. Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and everything beside. I am for the air. This night Ill spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end. Great business must be wrought ere noon. Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vap'rous drop profound. Ill catch it ere it come to ground. And that distilled by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion.
What Ive already said shows you we think alike, so you can draw your own conclusions. All Im saying is that strange things have been going on. Macbeth pitied Duncanafter Duncan was dead. And Banquo went out walking too late at night. If you like, we can say that Fleance must have killed him, because Fleance fled the scene of the crime. Clearly, men should not go out walking too late! And who can help thinking how monstrous it was for Malcolm and Donalbain to kill their gracious father? Such a heinous crimehow it saddened MacbethLennox speaks sarcastically throughout this speech, making it clear that he thinks Macbeth is guilty of the murders.Macbeth! Wasnt it loyal of him to kill those two servants right away, while they were still drunk and asleep? That was the right thing to do, wasnt it? Yes, and it was the wise thing, too, because we all would have been outraged to hear those two deny their crime. Considering all this, I think Macbeth has handled things well. If he had Duncans sons in prisonwhich I hope wont happenthey would find out how awful the punishment is for those who kill their fathers, and so would Fleance. But enough of that. I hear that Macduff is out of favor with the king because he speaks his mind too plainly, and because he failed to show up at Macbeths feast. Can you tell me where hes hiding himself?	My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, Which can interpret farther. Only I say Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth. Marry, he was dead. And the right-valiant Banquo walked too late, Whom, you may say, if t please you, Fleance killed, For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father? Damnd fact! How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too, For twould have angered any heart alive To hear the men deny t. So that, I say, He has borne all things well. And I do think That had he Duncans sons under his key As, ant please heaven, he shall notthey should find What twere to kill a father. So should Fleance. But, peace! For from broad words, and 'cause he failed His presence at the tyrants feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?
Duncans son Malcolm, whose birthright and throne Macbeth has stolen, lives in the English court. There, the saintly King Edward treats Malcolm so well that despite Malcolms misfortunes, hes not deprived of respect. Macduff went there to ask King Edward for help. He wants Edward to help him form an alliance with the people of Northumberland and their lord, Siward. Macduff hopes that with their helpand with the help of God abovehe may once again put food on our tables, bring peace back to our nights, free our feasts and banquets from violent murders, allow us to pay proper homage to our king, and receive honors freely. Those are the things we pine for now. Macbeth has heard this news and he is so angry that hes preparing for war.	The son of Duncan From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth Lives in the English court and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff Is gone to pray the holy king upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward, That by the help of thesewith Him above To ratify the workwe may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honors. All which we pine for now. And this report Hath so exasperated the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.
The tawny cat has meowed three times.	Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.
Three times. And the hedgehog has whined once.	Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.
My spirit friend, Harpier, is yelling, Its time, its time!	Harpier cries, 'Tis time, tis time.
Dance around the cauldron and throw in the poisoned entrails. (holding up a toad) Youll go in firsta toad that sat under a cold rock for a month, oozing poison from its pores.	Round about the cauldron go, In the poisoned entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Sweltered venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' th' charmd pot.
Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.	Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
(holding something up) Well boil you in the cauldron nexta slice of swamp snake. All the rest of you in too: a newts eye, a frogs tongue, fur from a bat, a dogs tongue, the forked tongue of an adder, the stinger of a burrowing worm, a lizards leg, an owls wing. (speaking to the ingredients) Make a charm to cause powerful trouble, and boil and bubble like a broth of hell.	Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake. Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adders fork and blind-worms sting, Lizards leg and owlets wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn and cauldron bubble.	Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
What did he do that made him flee this land?	What had he done to make him fly the land?
You have to be patient, madam.	You must have patience, madam.
He had no patience. He was crazy to run away. Even if youre not a traitor, youre going to look like one if you run away.	He had none. His flight was madness. When our actions do not, Our fears do make us traitors.
You dont know whether it was wisdom or fear that made him flee.	You know not Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
How could it be wisdom! To leave his wife, his children, his house, and his titles in a place so unsafe that he himself flees it! He doesnt love us. He lacks the natural instinct to protect his family. Even the fragile wren, the smallest of birds, will fight against the owl when it threatens her young ones in the nest. His running away has everything to do with fear and nothing to do with love. And since its so unreasonable for him to run away, it has nothing to do with wisdom either.	Wisdom! To leave his wife, to leave his babes, His mansion and his titles in a place From whence himself does fly? He loves us not; He wants the natural touch. For the poor wren, The most diminutive of birds, will fight, Her young ones in her nest, against the owl. All is the fear and nothing is the love, As little is the wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.
My dearest relative, Im begging you, pull yourself together. As for your husband, he is noble, wise, and judicious, and he understands what the times require. Its not safe for me to say much more than this, but times are bad when people get denounced as traitors and dont even know why. In times like these, we believe frightening rumors but we dont even know what were afraid of. Its like being tossed around on the ocean in every direction, and finally getting nowhere. Ill say good-bye now. It wont be long before Im back. When things are at their worst they have to stop, or else improve to the way things were before. My young cousin, I put my blessing upon you.	My dearest coz, I pray you school yourself. But for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' th' season. I dare not speak much further; But cruel are the times when we are traitors And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and none. I take my leave of you. Shall not be long but Ill be here again. Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before.My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you.
Lets seek out some shady place where we can sit down alone and cry our hearts out.	Let us seek out some desolate shade and there Weep our sad bosoms empty.
Instead of crying, lets keep hold of our swords and defend our fallen homeland like honorable men. Each day new widows howl, new orphans cry, and new sorrows slap heaven in the face, until it sounds like heaven itself feels Scotlands anguish and screams in pain.	Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men, Bestride our downfall'n birthdom. Each new morn New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yelled out Like syllable of dolor.
I will avenge whatever I believe is wrong. And Ill believe whatever Im sure is true. And Ill put right whatever I can when the time comes. What you just said may perhaps be true. This tyrant, whose mere name is so awful it hurts us to say it, was once considered an honest man. You were one of his favorites. He hasnt done anything to harm you yet. Im inexperienced, but maybe youre planning to win Macbeths favor by betraying me to him. It would be smart to offer someone poor and innocent like me as a sacrificial lamb to satisfy an angry god like Macbeth.	What I believe Ill wail; What know believe, and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will. What you have spoke, it may be so perchance. This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest. You have loved him well. He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but something You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb T' appease an angry god.
I am not treacherous.	I am not treacherous.
But Macbeth is. Even someone with a good and virtuous nature might give way to a royal command. But I beg your pardon. My fears cant actually make you evil. Angels are still bright even though Lucifer, the brightest angel, fell from heaven. Even though everything evil wants to look good, good still has to look good too.	But Macbeth is. A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon. That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose. Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell. Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.
Ive stayed up with you for two nights now, and I havent seen any evidence of what you were talking about. When was the last time you saw her sleepwalking?	I have two nights watched with you but can perceive notruth in your report. When was it she last walked?
Since Macbeth went to war, I have seen her rise from her bed, put on her nightgown, unlock her closet, take out some paper, fold it, write on it, read it, seal it up, and then return to bed, remaining asleep the entire time.	Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon t, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this whilein a most fast sleep.
Its unnatural to be asleep and act as if youre awake. When she is like this, besides walking and performing various activities, have you heard her say anything?	A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the line>effects of watching. In this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and otheractual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?
She says something, sir, but I will not repeat it to you.	That, sir, which I will not report after her.
You can tell me. You really should.	You may to me, and tis most meet you should.
I will not confess it to you nor to anyone else, because there was no one else to witness her speech.	Neither to you nor any one, having no witness to confirm my speech.
	
How did she get that candle?	How came she by that light?
The English army is near, led by Malcolm, his uncle Siward, and the good Macduff. They burn for revenge. The wrongs they have suffered would make dead men rise up and fight.	The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, His uncle Siward and the good Macduff. Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.
Well meet them near Birnam Wood. They are coming that way.	Near Birnam Wood Shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.
Does anyone know if Donalbain is with his brother?	Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
He is definitely not there, sir. I have a list of all the important men. Siwards son is there, as well as many boys too young to have beards who will become men by joining in this battle.	For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file Of all the gentry. There is Siwards son, And many unrough youths that even now Protest their first of manhood.
What is the tyrant Macbeth doing?	What does the tyrant?
He is fortifying his castle at Dunsinane with heavy defenses. Some say hes insane. Those who hate him less call it brave anger. One thing is certain: hes out of control.	Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies. Some say hes mad, others that lesser hate him Do call it valiant fury. But, for certain, He cannot buckle his distempered cause Within the belt of rule.
Now Macbeth feels the blood of his murdered enemies sticking to his hands. Now, rebel armies punish him every minute for his treachery. The soldiers he commands are only following orders. They dont fight because they love Macbeth. Now he seems too small to be a great king, like a midget trying to wear the robes of a giant.	Now does he feel His secret murders sticking on his hands. Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach. Those he commands move only in command, Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title Hang loose about him, like a giants robe Upon a dwarfish thief.
Dont bring me any more reports. I dont care if all the thanes desert me. Until Birnam Wood gets up and moves to Dunsinane, I wont be affected by fear. Whats the boy Malcolm? Wasnt he born from a woman? The spirits that know the future have told me this: Dont be afraid, Macbeth. No man born from a woman will ever defeat you. So get out of here, disloyal thanes, and join the weak and decadent English! My mind and courage will never falter with doubt or shake with fear.	Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all. Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane I cannot taint with fear. Whats the boy Malcolm? Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: Fear not, Macbeth. No man thats born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee. Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures. The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.
	Where gotst thou that goose look?
There are ten thousand	There is ten thousand
Geese, you idiot?	Geese, villain?
Soldiers, sir.	Soldiers, sir.
Go pinch your cheeks and bring some color back into your face, you cowardly boy. What soldiers, fool? Curse you! That pale face of yours will frighten the others as well. What soldiers, milk-face?	Go, prick thy face and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch? Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
The English army, sir.	The English force, so please you.
Get out of my sight.	Take thy face hence.
Kinsmen, I hope the time is coming when people will be safe in their own bedrooms.	Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand That chambers will be safe.
We dont doubt it.	We doubt it nothing.
Whats the name of this forest behind us?	What wood is this before us?
Birnam Wood.	The wood of Birnam.
Tell every soldier to break off a branch and hold it in front of him. That way we can conceal how many of us there are, and Macbeths spies will give him inaccurate reports.	Let every soldier hew him down a bough And bear t before him. Thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.
Well do it.	It shall be done.
We have no news except that the overconfident Macbeth is still in Dunsinane and will allow us to lay siege to the castle.	We learn no other but the confident tyrant Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure Our setting down before t.
He wants us to lay siege. Wherever his soldiers have an opportunity to leave him, they do, whatever rank they are. No one fights with him except men who are forced to, and their hearts arent in it.	'Tis his main hope: For, where there is advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constraind things Whose hearts are absent too.
We shouldnt make any judgments until we achieve our goal. Lets go fight like hardworking soldiers.	Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.
Hang our flags on the outer walls. Everyone keeps yelling, Here they come! Our castle is strong enough to laugh off their seige. They can sit out there until they die of hunger and disease. If it werent for the fact that so many of our soldiers revolted and joined them, we could have met them out in front of the castle, man to man, and beaten them back to England.	Hang out our banners on the outward walls. The cry is still They come! Our castles strength Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up. Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.
	
Its women crying, my good lord.	It is the cry of women, my good lord.
Ive almost forgotten what fear feels like. There was a time when I would have been terrified by a shriek in the night, and the hair on my skin would have stood up when I heard a ghost story. But now Ive had my fill of real horrors. Horrible things are so familiar that they cant startle me.	I have almost forgot the taste of fears. The time has been my senses would have cooled To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir As life were in t. I have supped full with horrors. Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts Cannot once start me.
	
The queen is dead, my lord.	The queen, my lord, is dead.
Were close enough now. Throw down these branches and show them who you really are. Uncle Siward, you and your son will lead the first battle. Brave Macduff and I will do the rest, according to our battle plan.	Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down, And show like those you are.You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon s what else remains to do, According to our order.
Good luck. If we meet Macbeths army tonight, let us be beaten if we cannot fight.	Fare you well. Do we but find the tyrants power tonight, Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
Blow all the trumpets. They loudly announce the news of blood and death.	Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath, Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
They have me tied to a stake. I cant run away. I have to stand and fight, like a bearIn Shakespeares time, bears were tied to stakes and attacked by dogs for the amusement of audiences.bear.Wheres the man who wasnt born from a woman? Hes the only one Im afraid of, nobody else.	They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly, But, bearlike, I must fight the course. Whats he That was not born of woman? Such a one Am I to fear, or none.
Whats your name?	What is thy name?
Youll be afraid to hear it.	Thou 'lt be afraid to hear it.
No I wont, even if you were one of the worst demons in hell.	No, though thou callst thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell.
My names Macbeth.	My names Macbeth.
The devil himself couldnt say a name I hate more.	The devil himself could not pronounce a title More hateful to mine ear.
No, nor could the devils name be more frightening.	No, nor more fearful.
You lie, you disgusting tyrant. Ill prove with my sword that Im not scared of you.	Thou liest, abhorrd tyrant. With my sword Ill prove the lie thou speakst.
You were born from a woman. Swords dont frighten me. I laugh at any weapon used by a man who was born from a woman.	Thou wast born of woman. But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, Brandished by man thats of a woman born.
Why should I commit suicide like one of the ancient Romans? As long as I see enemies of mine alive, I would rather see my sword wound them than me.	Why should I play the Roman fool and die On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes Do better upon them.
Turn around, you dog from hell, turn around!	Turn, hellhound, turn!
You are the only man I have avoided. But go away now. Im already guilty of killing your whole family.	Of all men else I have avoided thee. But get thee back. My soul is too much charged With blood of thine already.
I have nothing to say to you. My sword will talk for me. You are too evil for words!	I have no words. My voice is in my sword. Thou bloodier villain Than terms can give thee out!
Youre wasting your time trying to wound me. You might as well try to stab the air with your sword. Go fight someone who can be harmed. I lead a charmed life, which cant be ended by anyone born from a woman.	Thou losest labor. As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed. Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmd life, which must not yield To one of woman born.
You can forget about your charm. The evil spirit you serve can tell you that I was not born. They cut me out of my mothers womb before she could bear me naturally. 	Despair thy charm, And let the angel whom thou still hast served Tell thee, Macduff was from his mothers womb Untimely ripped. 
To be honest, I dont know why Im so sad. Im tired of it, and you say youre tired of it too. But I have no idea how I got so depressed. And if I cant figure out whats making me depressed, I must not understand myself very well.	In sooth, I know not why I am so sad. It wearies me; you say it wearies you. But how I caught it, found it, or came by it, What stuff tis made of, whereof it is born, I am to learn. And such a want-wit sadness makes of me, That I have much ado to know myself.
Youre worried about your ships. Your mind is out there getting tossed around on the ocean with them. But theyre fine. Theyre like huge parade floats on the sea. Theyre so big they look down on the smaller ships, which all have to bow and then get out of the way. Your ships fly like birds past those little boats.	Your mind is tossing on the ocean, There, where your argosies with portly sail, Like signors and rich burghers on the flood Or, as it were, the pageants of the sea Do overpeer the petty traffickers That curtsy to them, do them reverence As they fly by them with their woven wings.
Yes, believe me, if I had such risky business ventures in other countries, Id be sad too. Id worry about it every second. Id constantly be tossing blades of grass into the air to find out which way the wind was blowing. Id be peering over maps to figure out the best ports, piers, and waterways. Everything that made me worry about my ships would make me sad.	Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth, The better part of my affections would Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind, Peering in maps for ports and piers and roads. And every object that might make me fear Misfortune to my ventures out of doubt Would make me sad.
Id get scared every time I blew on my soup to cool it, thinking of how a strong wind could wipe out my ships. Every time I glanced at the sand in an hourglass Id imagine my ships wrecked on sandbars. Id think of dangerous rocks every time I went to church and saw the stones it was made of. If my ship brushed up against rocks like that, its whole cargo of spices would be dumped into the sea. All of its silk shipments would be sent flying into the roaring waters. In one moment Id go bankrupt. Who wouldnt get sad thinking about things like that? Its obvious. Antonio is sad because hes so worried about his cargo.	My wind cooling my broth Would blow me to an ague when I thought What harm a wind too great at sea might do. I should not see the sandy hourglass run, But I should think of shallows and of flats And see my wealthy Andrew docked in sand, Vailing her high top lower than her ribs To kiss her burial. Should I go to church And see the holy edifice of stone And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks, Which, touching but my gentle vessels side, Would scatter all her spices on the stream, Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks, And, in a word, but even now worth this, And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought To think on this, and shall I lack the thought That such a thing bechanced would make me sad? But tell not me. I know Antonio Is sad to think upon his merchandise.
No, thats not it, trust me. Thankfully my financial situation is healthy. I dont have all of my money invested in one ship, or one part of the world. If I dont do well this year, Ill still be okay. So its not my business thats making me sad.	Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it My ventures are not in one bottom trusted, Nor to one place, nor is my whole estate Upon the fortune of this present year. Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.
Well then, you must be in love.	Why then, you are in love.
Oh, give me a break.	Fie, fie!
Youre not in love either? Fine, lets just say youre sad because youre not in a good mood. You know, itd be just as easy for you to laugh and dance around and say youre in a good mood. You could just say youre not sad. Humans are so different.	Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad Because you are not merryand twere as easy For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus, Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time.
	And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper, And other of such vinegar aspect That theyll not show their teeth in way of smile Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
	Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare ye well. We leave you now with better company.
I wouldve stayed to cheer you up, if your nobler friends hadnt shown up.	I would have stayed till I had made you merry If worthier friends had not prevented me.
Youre both very precious to me. But I understand. You need to leave to take care of your own business.	Your worth is very dear in my regard. I take it your own business calls on you And you embrace th' occasion to depart.
(to BASSANIO, LORENZO, and GRATIANO) Good morning, gentlemen.	(to BASSANIO, LORENZO, GRATIANO) Good morrow, my good lords.
(to SALARINO and SOLANIO) Hello, friends. When are we going to have fun together again? Just name the time. We never see you anymore. Does it have to be that way?	(to SALARINO and SOLANIO) Good signors both, when shall we laugh? Say, when? You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?
Let us know when you want to get together. Were available.	Well make our leisures to attend on yours.
Bassanio, well say goodbye for now, since youve found Antonio. But dont forget, were meeting for dinner tonight.	My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio, We two will leave you. But at dinnertime I pray you have in mind where we must meet.
Dont worry, Ill be there.	I will not fail you.
You dont look well, Antonio. Youre taking things too seriously. People with too much invested in the world always get hurt. Im telling you, you dont look like yourself.	You look not well, Signor Antonio. You have too much respect upon the world. They lose it that do buy it with much care. Believe me, you are marvelously changed.
For me the world is just the world, Gratianoa stage where every person has a part to play. I play a sad one.	I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano A stage where every man must play a part, And mine a sad one.
Then Ill play the happy fool and get laugh lines on my face. Id rather overload my liver with wine than starve my heart by denying myself fun. Why should any living man sit still like a statue? Why should he sleep when hes awake? Why should he get ulcers from being crabby all the time? I love you, and Im telling you this because I care about you, Antoniothere are men who always look serious. Their faces never move or show any expression, like stagnant ponds covered with scum. Theyre silent and stern, and they think theyre wise and deep, important and respectable. When they talk, they think everybody else should keep quiet, and that even dogs should stop barking. I know a lot of men like that, Antonio. The only reason theyre considered wise is because they dont say anything. Im sure if they ever opened their mouths, everyone would see what fools they are. Ill talk to you more about this some other time. In the meantime, cheer up. Dont go around looking so glum. Thats my opinion, but what do I know? Im a fool.Lets go, Lorenzo.Goodbye for now. Ill finish my lecture after dinner.	Let me play the fool. With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come. And let my liver rather heat with wine Than my heart cool with mortifying groans. Why should a man whose blood is warm within Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster, Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio I love thee, and tis my love that speaks There are a sort of men whose visages Do cream and mantle like a standing pond, And do a willful stillness entertain With purpose to be dressed in an opinion Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit, As who should say, I am Sir Oracle, And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark! O my Antonio, I do know of these That therefore only are reputed wise For saying nothing, when I am very sure If they should speak, would almost damn those ears Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools. Ill tell thee more of this another time. But fish not with this melancholy bait For this fool gudgeon, this opinion. Come, good Lorenzo.Fare ye well awhile. Ill end my exhortation after dinner.
All right, well see you at dinnertime. I must be one of these silent so-called wise men Gratianos talking about, because he never lets me get a word in.	Well, we will leave you then till dinnertime. I must be one of these same dumb wise men, For Gratiano never lets me speak.
If you hang around me for two more years, youll forget the sound of your own voice. I wont ever let you speak.	Well, keep me company but two years more, Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
Goodbye. After that lecture of yours, Ill start talking a lot.	Farewell. Ill grow a talker for this gear.
Thank you. The only tongues that should be silent are ox-tongues on a dinner plate and those that belong to old maids.	Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable In a neats tongue dried and a maid not vendible.
Is he right?	Is that any thing now?
Gratiano talks more nonsense than any other man in Venice. His point is always like a needle in a haystackyou look for it all day, and when you find it you realize it wasnt worth the trouble.	Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more thanany man in all Venice. His reasons are as two grains ofwheat hid in two bushels of chaffyou shall seek all dayere you find them, and when you have them they are notworth the search.
So, whos this girl, the one you said you were going to take a special trip for? You promised to tell me.	Well, tell me now what lady is the same To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage, That you today promised to tell me of?
Antonio, you know how bad my finances have been lately. Ive been living way beyond my means. Dont get me wrong, Im not complaining about having to cut back.	'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio, How much I have disabled mine estate, By something showing a more swelling port Than my faint means would grant continuance. Nor do I now make moan to be abridged From such a noble rate. But my chief care
	Wherein my time something too prodigal Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio, I owe the most in money and in love, And from your love I have a warranty To unburden all my plots and purposes How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
Please let me know your plan, Bassanio. As long as its honorable, you can be sure that Ill let you use all my money and do everything I can to help you.	I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it. And if it stand, as you yourself still do, Within the eye of honor, be assured My purse, my person, my extremest means Lie all unlocked to your occasions.
Back when I was a schoolboy, if I lost an arrow I would try to find it by shooting another arrow in the same direction, watching the second arrow more carefully than I had the first. By risking the second arrow, Id often get both of them back. Im telling you this story for a reason. I owe you a lot, and like a spoiled kid Ive lost what I owe you. But if youd be willing to shoot another arrow the same way you shot the first, Ill watch your arrow more carefully this time. Either well get back all the money I owe you, or else well get back what you lend me this time, and Ill just owe you what I already owe you.	In my school days, when I had lost one shaft, I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight The selfsame way with more advisd watch To find the other forthand by adventuring both, I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof Because what follows is pure innocence. I owe you much, and, like a willful youth, That which I owe is lost. But if you please To shoot another arrow that self way Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt, As I will watch the aim, or to find both Or bring your latter hazard back again And thankfully rest debtor for the first.
You know me better than that. Youre wasting your breath. All of this talk means you have doubts about my friendship. Thats worse than if you bankrupted me. Just tell me what to do, and Ill do it. Tell me.	You know me well, and herein spend but time To wind about my love with circumstance. And out of doubt you do me now more wrong In making question of my uttermost Than if you had made waste of all I have. Then do but say to me what I should do That in your knowledge may by me be done, And I am pressed unto it. Therefore speak.
Theres a girl in Belmont whos inherited a huge amount of money, and shes beautiful andeven bettershes a good person. I think she likes me. Sometimes the expression on her face tells me she likes me. Her name is Portia. Shes as rich as that famous Roman heroine Portia, the daughter of Cato and wife of Brutus. Her wealth is world-famous. Famous and important men have come in from all over the world to try to marry her. The hair that hangs down on her forehead is like gold, calling every adventurer to Belmont like a gold rush. Antonio, if I only had enough money to hold my own against those suitors, I know I could win her!	In Belmont is a lady richly left, And she is fair andfairer than that word Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes I did receive fair speechless messages. Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued To Catos daughter, Brutus' Portia. Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth, For the four winds blow in from every coast Renownd suitors, and her sunny locks Hang on her temples like a golden fleece, Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strand, And many Jasons come in quest of her. O my Antonio, had I but the means To hold a rival place with one of them, I have a mind presages me such thrift That I should questionless be fortunate!
You know right now all my moneys tied up in that cargo thats still at sea. I cant give you the cash you need because I dont have it. But go ahead and charge things to me on credit, as much credit as I can get in Venice. Ill use all my lines of credit to help you get to Belmont, to Portia. Go see who will lend money, and Ill do the same. Im sure I can get something either as a business loan, or as a personal favor.	Thou knowst that all my fortunes are at sea. Neither have I money nor commodity To raise a present sum. Therefore go forth, Try what my credit can in Venice do That shall be racked even to the uttermost To furnish thee to Belmont, to fair Portia. Go presently inquire, and so will I, Where money is, and I no question make To have it of my trust or for my sake.
Oh Nerissa, my poor little body is tired of this great big world.	By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this greatworld.
Youd be tired, madam, if you had bad luck rather than wealth and good luck. But as far as I can tell, people with too much suffer as much as people with nothing. The best way to be happy is to be in between. When you have too much you get old sooner, but having just enough helps you live longer.	You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in thesame abundance as your good fortunes are. And yet foraught I see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much asthey that starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness,therefore, to be seated in the mean. Superfluity comessooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.
Good point, and well said.	Good sentences, and well pronounced.
It would be better if you actually applied it to your life.	They would be better if well followed.
You think its that easy? If doing good deeds were as easy as knowing how to do them, then everyone would be better off. Small chapels would be big churches, and poor mens cottages would be princes' palaces. It takes a good priest to practice what he preaches. For me, its easier to lecture twenty people on how to be good than to be the one person out of twenty who actually does good things. The brain can tell the heart what to do, but what does it matter? Cold rules dont matter when youve got a hot temper. Young people are like frisky young rabbits, and good advice is like a crippled old man trying to catch them. But thinking like this wont help me choose a husband. Oh, the word choose is strange! I cant choose who I like, or refuse who I dislike. Im a living daughter still controlled by the wishes of her dead father. Isnt it a pain that I cant choose or refuse anyone, Nerissa?	If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do,chapels had been churches and poor mens cottagesprinces' palaces. It is a good divine that follows his owninstructions. I can easier teach twenty what were good tobe done than be one of the twenty to follow mine ownteaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood, but ahot temper leaps o'er a cold decree. Such a hare ismadness the youthto skip o'er the meshes of goodcounsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not in thefashion to choose me a husband. O me, the wordchoose! I may neither choose whom I would nor refusewhom I dislikeso is the will of a living daughter curbedby the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, that Icannot choose one nor refuse none?
Three thousand ducats, hmmm.	Three thousand ducats, well.
Yes, for three months.	Ay, sir, for three months.
For three months, hmmm.	For three months, well.
As I said before, Antonio will guarantee the loan. If I default, hell pay you.	For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.
Antonio will guarantee it, hmmm.	Antonio shall become bound, well.
Can you help me? Whats your answer?	May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I knowyour answer?
Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio will guarantee it.	Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antoniobound.
Your answer?	Your answer to that?
Antonios a good man.	Antonio is a good man.
Have you heard anything to the contrary?	Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
What? No, no, no, no. What I meant in saying hes a good man is that he has enough money to guarantee the loan. But his investments are uncertain right now. He has one ship bound for Tripoli, another heading for the Indies. Whats more, people at the RialtoThe Rialto is the business district of Venice, where the merchants meet.Rialto tell me he has a third ship in Mexico, and a fourth in England, as well as other business ventures throughout the world.	Ho, no, no, no, no. My meaning in saying he is a goodman is to have you understand me that he is sufficient. Yethis means are in supposition. He hath an argosy bound toTripolis, another to the Indies. I understand moreover,upon the Rialto, he hath a third at Mexico, a fourth forEngland, and other ventures he hath squandered abroad.
Dont hold my skin color against me. I was born and raised in the sun, which is why Im dark-skinned. But Im as red-blooded as any man. Show me the best-looking person born in the freezing north, where the sun barely thaws the icicles. Ill win your love by cutting myself to prove to you I have redder blood than he does. Im telling you, madam, my skin color has made brave men fear me and Moroccan girls love me. I wouldnt change it except to make you think of me, my darling queen.	Mislike me not for my complexion, The shadowed livery of the burnished sun, To whom I am a neighbor and near bred. Bring me the fairest creature northward born, Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles, And let us make incision for your love To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine Hath feared the valiant. By my love I swear The best-regarded virgins of our clime Have loved it too. I would not change this hue Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.
Being good-looking isnt the only way to my heart, you know. I have other criteria for choosing a husband. Not that it matters, because the box test takes away my free choice anyway. But if my father hadnt restricted me like thisforcing me to marry whoever wins his testthen youd have had as good a chance to marry me as any of the suitors Ive met so far, prince.	In terms of choice I am not solely led By nice direction of a maidens eyes. Besides, the lottery of my destiny Bars me the right of voluntary choosing. But if my father had not scanted me And hedged me by his wit to yield myself His wife who wins me by that means I told you, Yourself, renownd Prince, then stood as fair As any comer I have looked on yet For my affection.
Im sure Ill feel guilty if I run away from this Jew, my master. The devils on my shoulder, tempting me. Hes saying, Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, Good Launcelot, or Good Gobbo, or Good Launcelot Gobbouse your legs and run away. But my conscience says, No, Launcelot, calm down, dont run away. The devils urging me to leave. Go away! he says. Run away! Be tough, says the devil, and run! But then my conscience, hanging around my heart, says very wisely to me, My good friend Launcelot, youre a good boy, the son of an honest man, really, that should be the son of an honest woman, since my father cheated on my mother. Anyway, my conscience says, Stay put. Go, the devil says. Dont go, says my conscience. Conscience, I say, you give good advice. Devil, I say, you give good advice. If I listened to my conscience, Id stay with the Jew my master, whos a devil. But if I ran away from the Jew, Id be following the advice of the devil, whos the very devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the devil incarnate, and my conscience is giving me a hard time by telling me to stay with the Jew. The devils advice is nicer. Ill run, devil. Tell me to run, and Ill run.	Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from thisJew, my master. The fiend is at mine elbow and temptsme, saying to me, Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, GoodLauncelot, or Good Gobbo, or Good LauncelotGobbo use your legs, take the start, run away. Myconscience says, No. Take heed, honest Launcelot. Takeheed, honest Gobbo, or as aforesaid, Honest LauncelotGobbo, do not run. Scorn running with thy heels. Well,the most courageous fiend bids me pack. Fia! says thefiend. Away! says the fiend. For the heavens, rouse upa brave mind, says the fiend, and run. Well, myconscience, hanging about the neck of my heart, says verywisely to me, My honest friend Launcelot, being anhonest mans sonor rather an honest womans son, forindeed my father did something smack, something growto. He had a kind of taste.Well, my conscience says,Launcelot, budge not. Budge! says the fiend.Budge not, says my conscience. Conscience, say I,you counsel well. Fiend, say I, you counsel well.To be ruled by my conscience I should stay with the Jewmy master, who, God bless the mark, is a kind of devil.And to run away from the Jew I should be ruled by thefiend, who, saving your reverence, is the devil himself.Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnation. And in myconscience, my conscience is but a kind of hardconscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew.The fiend gives the more friendly counsel. I will run,fiend. My heels are at your command. I will run.
Im sorry youre leaving my father like this. Its hell in our house, and you helped cheer it up, like a funny devil. But goodbye. Heres a ducat for you. Youll soon be meeting Lorenzo at supper; hell be a guest of your new master. Give him this letter. (gives LAUNCELOT a letter) Do it secretly. Goodbye. I dont want my father to see me talking to you.	I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so. Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness. But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee. And Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see Lorenzo, who is thy new masters guest. Give him this letter. (gives LAUNCELOT a letter) Do it secretly. And so farewell. I would not have my father See me in talk with thee.
Goodbye. My tears show you my feelings, my beautiful pagan, my sweet Jew! Im sure some Christian will resort to trickery to get you. But goodbye. Its not manly to cry. Goodbye.	Adieu! Tears exhibit my tongue. Most beautiful pagan,most sweet Jew! If a Christian do not play the knave andget thee, I am much deceived. But adieu. These foolishdrops do something drown my manly spirit. Adieu.
Goodbye, Launcelot.	Farewell, good Launcelot.
	To be ashamed to be my fathers child! But though I am a daughter to his blood, I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo, If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife, Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
No, well sneak away at supper time, disguise ourselves with masks at my house, and come back in an hour.	Nay, we will slink away in supper time, Disguise us at my lodging, and return, All in an hour.
But we havent made any preparations.	We have not made good preparation.
We havent even talked about wholl be our torchbearers.	We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.
The masquerade party might turn out terribly if we dont manage things carefully. I think its better to call it off.	'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered, And better in my mind not undertook.
Its only four o'clock now. We have two hours to get ready.	'Tis now but four o'clock. We have two hours To furnish us.
	
(he gives LORENZO the letter) If you dont mind opening this letter, you can find out for yourself.	(giving LORENZO the letter) An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify.
I recognize the handwriting. Its beautiful handwriting. And the beautiful hand that wrote this letter is whiter than the paper its written on.	I know the hand. In faith, tis a fair hand, And whiter than the paper it writ on Is the fair hand that writ.
I bet its a love letter!	Love news, in faith?
(to LORENZO) May I be excused, sir?	(to LORENZO) By your leave, sir.
Well, youll see it with your own eyes. Youll see the difference between working for Shylock and working for Bassanio.(calling for his daughter) Jessica!You wont eat like a pig like you used to do at my place.Jessica!And sleep, and snore, and wear your clothes out.Jessica, Im calling you!	Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge, The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio. What, Jessica!Thou shalt not gormandize As thou hast done with me.What, Jessica! And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out Why, Jessica, I say!
Jessica!	Why, Jessica!
Who asked you to call her? Im not asking you to call her.	Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
You always loved to tell me I couldnt do anything without being told.	Your worship was wont to tell me that I could do nothingwithout bidding.
Did you call me? Do you need something?	Call you? What is your will?
Ive been invited to supper, Jessica. Here are my keys.But why should I go? I wasnt invited because they like me. Theyre just flattering me. But Ill go out of spite, to feed off the wasteful Christian.Jessica, my girl, watch the house. I dont feel like going. Things arent going my way right now. I know because I dreamed of money bags last night.	I am bid forth to supper, Jessica. There are my keys.But wherefore should I go? I am not bid for love. They flatter me. But yet Ill go in hate to feed upon The prodigal Christian.Jessica, my girl, Look to my house. I am right loath to go. There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest, For I did dream of money bags tonight.
This is the roof under which Lorenzo said to meet him.	This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo Desired us to make stand.
Hes late.	His hour is almost past.
Yes, and thats surprising, because lovers are usually early.	And it is marvel he outdwells his hour, For lovers ever run before the clock.
Yes, for new lovers time passes ten times faster than for couples whove been married forever.	Oh, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly To seal loves bonds new made than they are wont To keep obligd faith unforfeited.
Thats always true. Who gets up from a meal with the same appetite he had when he sat down? Can any horse retrace his footsteps with the same energy he had when he walked them the first time? We chase everything in life more excitedly than we actually enjoy it when we get it. Its like when a ship sails out of the harbor with all its flags waving, gently pushed by the wind. When that ship returns, her timber is all weather-beaten and her sails are ragged. That same wind makes the ship thin and poor.	That ever holds. Who riseth from a feast With that keen appetite that he sits down? Where is the horse that doth untread again His tedious measures with the unbated fire That he did pace them first? All things that are, Are with more spirit chasd than enjoyed. How like a younger or a prodigal The scarfd bark puts from her native bay, Hugged and embrad by the strumpet wind! How like the prodigal doth she return, With overweathered ribs and ragged sails Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!
Here comes Lorenzo. Well talk about this later.	Here comes Lorenzo. More of this hereafter.
(to servant) Go open the curtains and show the different boxes to the prince.	(to servant) Go draw aside the curtains and discover The several caskets to this noble prince.
	
	
The first one, the gold one, has an inscription that says, He who chooses me will get what many men want. The second one, the silver one, says, He who chooses me will get what he deserves. And this third one is made of dull lead. It has a blunt warning that says, He who chooses me must give and risk all he has. How will I know if I chose the right one?	The first, of gold, who this inscription bears: Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire. The second, silver, which this promise carries: Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves. This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt: Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath. How shall I know if I do choose the right?
One of them contains my picture. If you choose that one, Im yours, along with the picture.	The one of them contains my picture, Prince. If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
I wish some god could help me choose! Let me see. Ill look over the inscriptions again. What does the lead box say? He who chooses me must give and risk all he has. Must give everythingfor what? For lead? Risk everything for lead? This box is too threatening. Men who risk everything hope to make profits. A golden mind doesnt bend down to choose something worthless. So I wont give or risk anything for lead. What does the silver one say?	Some god direct my judgment! Let me see. I will survey th' inscriptions back again. What says this leaden casket? Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath. Must givefor what? For lead? Hazard for lead? This casket threatens. Men that hazard all Do it in hope of fair advantages. A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross. Ill then nor give nor hazard aught for lead. What says the silver with her virgin hue?
I saw Bassanio sail away, and Gratiano went with him. Im sure Lorenzo isnt on their ship.	Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail. With him is Gratiano gone along. And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
That wicked Jew got the duke to listen to his complaints. The duke went with him to search Bassanios ship.	The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke, Who went with him to search Bassanios ship.
He got there too late. The ship was already sailing. But once he got there, the duke learned that Lorenzo and his lover Jessica were together in a gondola. In any case, Antonio assured the duke they werent with Bassanio on his ship.	He came too late. The ship was under sail. But there the Duke was given to understand That in a gondola were seen together Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica. Besides, Antonio certified the Duke They were not with Bassanio in his ship.
Ive never heard such confused emotions as what that Jew dog was shouting in the streets. My daughter, oh my ducats, oh my daughter! Ran off with a Christian! Oh my Christian ducats! Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter, a sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats, of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter, and jewelstwo stones, two rich and precious stonesstolen by my daughter! Justice, find the girl! She has the stones on her, and the ducats.	I never heard a passion so confused, So strange, outrageous, and so variable, As the dog Jew did utter in the streets. My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter, Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats! Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter! A seald bag, two seald bags of ducats, Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter! And jewelstwo stones, two rich and precious stones Stol'n by my daughter! Justice, find the girl! She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.
I know, all the boys in Venice are following him, yelling, His stones, his daughter, and his ducats!	Why, all the boys in Venice follow him, Crying, His stones, his daughter, and his ducats!
Hurry, hurry, close the curtain quick. The prince of Arragon has taken his oath, and hes coming to make his choice now.	Quick, quick, I pray thee. Draw the curtain straight. The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath And comes to his election presently.
Look, here are the boxes, prince. If you choose the one that contains my picture, well be married right away. But if you fail, you have to leave immediately. No pleas will be allowed.	Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince. If you choose that wherein I am contained, Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized. But if you fail, without more speech, my lord, You must be gone from hence immediately.
I swore Id do three things. First, I can never tell anyone what box I choose. Second, if I choose the wrong box, Ill never propose marriage for the rest of my life. Third, if I pick the wrong box, Ill leave immediately.	I am enjoined by oath to observe three things: First, never to unfold to any one Which casket twas I chose; next, if I fail Of the right casket, never in my life To woo a maid in way of marriage; lastly, If I do fail in fortune of my choice, Immediately to leave you and be gone.
Everyone who comes to gamble on winning me has to swear to these three rules.	To these injunctions every one doth swear That comes to hazard for my worthless self.
Okay, Im ready. I hope luck will give me what my heart hopes for! Gold, silver, and common lead. He who chooses me must give and risk all he has. Youd have to be more attractive for me to give or risk anything for you. What does the golden box say? Hmm, let me see:	And so have I addressed me. Fortune now To my hearts hope! Gold, silver, and base lead. Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath. You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard. What says the golden chest? Ha, let me see. Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.
So, whats the news on the Rialto?	Now, what news on the Rialto?
Well, theres a rumor that Antonio had a ship carrying expensive cargo that shipwrecked in the English Channel on the Goodwin Sands, a very dangerous sandbar. Many ships have sunk there, according to rumors.	Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio hath aship of rich lading wracked on the narrow seas. TheGoodwins I think they call the placea very dangerousflat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lieburied, as they say, if my gossip report be an honestwoman of her word.
I hope this new rumor is a lie, like the gossiping widows claim that she was sorry her third husband died! But its trueI dont want to get all mushy and go on and on, but the good Antonio, the honest Antoniooh, if I only had a title good enough to match his!	I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knappedginger or made her neighbors believe she wept for thedeath of a third husband. But it is true, without any slipsof prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk, that thegood Antonio, the honest Antoniooh, that I had a titlegood enough to keep his name company!
Come on, get to the point.	Come, the full stop.
What are you saying? Well, the point is, hes lost a ship.	Ha, what sayest thou? Why, the end is he hath lost a ship.
I hope thats all he loses.	I would it might prove the end of his losses.
Let me say amen quickly, before the devil comes in and stops my prayerbecause here comes the devil, disguised as a Jew.	Let me say Amen betimes, lest the devil cross myprayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.
(to BASSANIO) Please wait a day or two before making your choice. If you choose wrong, Ill lose your company. So wait a while. Something tells menot love, but somethingthat I dont want to lose you, and you know that if I hated you I wouldnt think that. But let me put it more clearly in case you dont understandthough I know girls arent supposed to express their thoughtsIm just saying Id like you to stay here for a month or two before you undergo the test for me. I could tell you how to choose correctly, but then Id be disregarding the oath I took. So Ill never tell. But you might lose me by making the wrong choice. If you do choose wrong, youll make me wish for something very bad. Id wish I had ignored my oath and told you everything. God, your eyes have bewitched me. Theyve divided me in two. One half of me is yours, and the other halfmy own half, Id call itbelongs to you too. If its mine, then its yours, and so Im all yours. But in this awful day and age people dont even have the right to their own property! So though Im yours, Im not yours. If theres no chance for me to be yours, then its just bad luck. I know Im talking too much, but I do that just to make the time last longer, and to postpone your test.	(to BASSANIO) I pray you, tarry. Pause a day or two Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong I lose your company. Therefore forbear awhile. Theres something tells mebut it is not love I would not lose you, and you know yourself Hate counsels not in such a quality. But lest you should not understand me well And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought I would detain you here some month or two Before you venture for me. I could teach you How to choose right, but I am then forsworn. So will I never be. So may you miss me. But if you do, youll make me wish a sin, That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes, They have o'erlooked me and divided me. One half of me is yours, the other half yours Mine own, I would say. But if mine, then yours, And so all yours. Oh, these naughty times Put bars between the owners and their rights! And so, though yours, not yours. Prove it so. Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I. I speak too long, but tis to peize the time, To eke it and to draw it out in length, To stay you from election.
Let me choose now. I feel tortured by all this talking.	Let me choose, For as I am, I live upon the rack.
Tortured, BassanioPortia and Bassanio are role-playing here, pretending to be torturer and victim.Bassanio? Then confess to your crime. Tell us about the treason youve mixed in with your love.	Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess What treason there is mingled with your love.
Jailer, watch out for this one. Dont try to convince me to feel sorry for him. This is the fool who lent out money without charging interest. Jailer, keep an eye on him.	Jailer, look to him. Tell not me of mercy. This is the fool that lent out money gratis. Jailer, look to him.
Listen to me, good Shylock.	Hear me yet, good Shylock.
Im going to get my bondShylock uses the word bond here to mean the goods Antonio promised to give Shylock if he defaulted on the loanin other words, the pound of Antonios flesh.bond . Dont try to say anything against my taking my bond. Ive sworn an oath that I will have my bond. You called me a dog before you had any reason to. But since Im a dog, beware my fangs. The duke will give me justice.I do wonder, jailer, how you can be so foolish as to let this prisoner out of his cell.	Ill have my bond. Speak not against my bond. I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond. Thou calledst me dog before thou hadst a cause. But since I am a dog, beware my fangs. The duke shall grant me justice.I do wonder, Thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond To come abroad with him at his request.
Please, listen to me.	I pray thee, hear me speak.
I want my bond. I wont listen to you. I want my bond, so stop talking. I wont be taken for a fool who sighs and gives in to Christian meddlers. Dont follow me. Im not talking with you. I want my bond.	Ill have my bond. I will not hear thee speak. Ill have my bond, and therefore speak no more. Ill not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool To shake the head, relent and sigh, and yield To Christian intercessors. Follow not. Ill have no speaking. I will have my bond.
Hes the most stubborn dog that ever lived among humans.	It is the most impenetrable cur That ever kept with men.
Madam, I hope you dont mind my saying that I admire your noble respect for friendship, which you show in letting your husband go off to help his friend like this. If you only knew the man youre helping out, and what a faithful gentleman he is and how much he loves your husband, I know youd be even prouder of your kindness than you normally might be.	Madam, although I speak it in your presence, You have a noble and a true conceit Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly In bearing thus the absence of your lord. But if you knew to whom you show this honor, How true a gentleman you send relief, How dear a lover of my lord your husband, I know you would be prouder of the work Than customary bounty can enforce you.
Ive never regretted doing good, and I dont now. Friends who spend a lot of time together and really care equally for each other must have many traits in common. Since Antonios my husbands best friend, they must be very similar men. In that case, the money Ive sent is a small price to pay to rescue someone who resembles my Bassanio, whos like my own soul.Anyway, lets change the subject, since I feel like Im starting to flatter myself. I have a favor to ask of you. Lorenzo, please take charge of the management of my house until my husband comes back.	I never did repent for doing good, Nor shall not now; for in companions That do converse and waste the time together Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love, There must be needs a like proportion Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit, Which makes me think that this Antonio, Being the bosom lover of my lord, Must needs be like my lord. If it be so, How little is the cost I have bestowed In purchasing the semblance of my soul From out the state of hellish cruelty! This comes too near the praising of myself. Therefore no more of it. Hear other things. Lorenzo, I commit into your hands The husbandry and manage of my house Until my lords return.
Yes, look, its true that children are punished for the sins of their fathers. Thats why Im worried about you. Ive always been straightforward with you, so now Im telling you what I think. Cheer up, because I think youre going to hell. Theres only one hope for you, and even thats a kind of illegitimate hope.	Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father are to be laidupon the children. Therefore I promise ye I fear you. Iwas always plain with you, and so now I speak myagitation of the matter. Therefore be o' good cheer, fortruly I think you are damned. There is but one hope in itthat can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastardhope neither.
What hope is that, may I ask?	And what hope is that, I pray thee?
You can hope your father isnt your real father. Maybe your mother fooled around, and you arent the Jews daughter.	Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not,that you are not the Jews daughter.
That really is an illegitimate hope. Then Id be punished for the sins of my mother.	That were a kind of bastard hope indeed. So the sins of mymother should be visited upon me.
In that case Im afraid youre damned by both your father and your mother. When you avoid one trap, you fall into another. Youre in trouble either way.	Truly then I fear you are damned both by father andmother. Thus when I shun Scylla your father, I fall intoCharybdis your mother. Well, you are gone both ways.
My husband will save me. Hes made me a Christian.	I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made me a Christian.
He was wrong to do that. There were enough Christians beforeas many of them as could stand to live near each other. All these new Christians will make the price of hogs go up. If were all pork-eaters, we wont be able to get our hands on a slice of bacon, even if weve got the money for it.	Truly, the more to blame he. We were Christians eno'before, e'en as many as could well live one by another.This making Christians will raise the price of hogs. If wegrow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have arasher on the coals for money.
Is Antonio here?	What, is Antonio here?
Yes, sir, Im here.	Ready, so please your grace.
I feel sorry for you. Youve come to face a ruthless enemy, an inhuman wretch incapable of pity, without any feelings of mercy.	I am sorry for thee. Thou art come to answer A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch Uncapable of pity, void and empty From any dram of mercy.
They tell me youve done everything you can to talk him out of what hes doing. But since he remains stubborn, and theres no legal way to protect me from his malice, Ill just have to take what hell give me. Im ready to suffer peacefully whatever he does to me in his cruelty and anger.	I have heard Your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify His rigorous course. But since he stands obdurate And that no lawful means can carry me Out of his envys reach, I do oppose My patience to his fury, and am armed To suffer with a quietness of spirit The very tyranny and rage of his.
One of you go call the Jew into court here.	Go, one, and call the Jew into the court.
Hes standing ready outside the door. Here he comes, my lord.	He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.
Find out where the Jews house is. Give him this deed and have him sign it. Well leave tonight and be home a day before our husbands get back. Lorenzo will be happy with what weve done.	Inquire the Jews house out. Give him this deed, And let him sign it. Well away tonight, And be a day before our husbands home. This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.
(he gives PORTIA BASSANIOs ring) Sir, youre lucky I caught up with you. Bassanio thought about it some more and sent this ring to you. He would like to invite you to dinner.	(giving PORTIA BASSANIOs ring) Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en. My Lord Bassanio upon more advice Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat Your company at dinner.
I cant have dinner with him. Please tell him I accept his ring with thanks. And could you please take my servant to old Shylocks house?	That cannot be. His ring I do accept most thankfully. And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore, I pray you show my youth old Shylocks house.
Ill do that.	That will I do.
(to PORTIA) Sir, may I speak with you? (speaking so that only PORTIAcan hear) Ill see if I can get my husbands ring, which I made him swear to keep forever.	(to PORTIA) Sir, I would speak with you. (aside to PORTIA) Ill see if I can get my husbands ring, Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.
(to NERISSA) I bet youll be able to. Theyll swear they gave the rings to men. But well deny it and outswear them too.	(aside to NERISSA) Thou mayst, I warrant. We shall have old swearing That they did give the rings away to men. But well outface them, and outswear them too.
The moons bright tonight. I think that on a night like this, when the wind blew the trees so gently that they didnt make a sound, TroilusTroilus was the son of King Priam of Troy. His lover, Cressida, was sent to the Greek camp, where she betrayed him.Troilus climbed up onto the walls of Troy and sighed for Cressida in the Greek camp.	The moon shines bright. In such a night as this, When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees And they did make no noise, in such a night Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan walls And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents Where Cressid lay that night.
On a night like this, ThisbeThisbe had agreed to meet her lover Pyramus, but was frightened away by a lion. Pyramus killed himself because he thought the lion had eaten her, and Thisbe killed herself when she found Pyramus dead.Thisbe saw the lions shadow and ran away in fear.	In such a night Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew And saw the lions shadow ere himself And ran dismayed away.
On a night like this, DidoDido, the queen of Carthage, was abandoned by her lover Aeneas.Dido stood holding a willow branch on the seashore, begging her lover to come back to her in Carthage.	In such a night Stood Dido with a willow in her hand Upon the wild sea banks, and waft her love To come again to Carthage.
On a night like this, MedeaMedea used her magic to help her lover, Jasons father. Later, Jason betrayed her, and she murdered their children in revenge.Medea gathered magic herbs to rejuvenate old Aeson. 	In such a night Medea gathered the enchanted herbs That did renew old son. 
Our wedding day is almost here, my beautiful Hippolyta. Well be getting married in four days, on the day of the new moon. But it seems to me that the days are passing too slowlythe old moon is taking too long to fade away! That old, slow moon is keeping me from getting what I want, just like an old widow makes her stepson wait to get his inheritance.	Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in Another moon. But oh, methinks how slow This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires, Like to a stepdame or a dowager Long withering out a young mans revenue.
No, youll see, four days will quickly turn into four nights. And since we dream at night, time passes quickly then. Finally the new moon, curved like a silver bow in the sky, will look down on our wedding celebration.	Four days will quickly steep themselves in night. Four nights will quickly dream away the time. And then the moon, like to a silver bow New bent in heaven, shall behold the night Of our solemnities.
Go, Philostrate, get the young people of Athens ready to celebrate and have a good time. Sadness is only appropriate for funerals. We dont want it at our festivities.	Go, Philostrate, Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments. Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth. Turn melancholy forth to funerals. The pale companion is not for our pomp.
	And won thy love doing thee injuries. But I will wed thee in another key, With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.
Long live Theseus, our famous and respected duke!	Happy be Theseus, our renownd duke.
Thanks, good Egeus. Whats new with you?	Thanks, good Egeus. Whats the news with thee?
Im here, full of anger, to complain about my daughter Hermia.Step forward, Demetrius.My lord, this man, Demetrius, has my permission to marry her.Step forward, Lysander.But this other man, Lysander, has cast a magic spell over my childs heart.You, you, Lysander, youve given her poems, and exchanged tokens of love with my daughter. Youve pretended to be in love with her, singing fake love songs softly at her window by moonlight, and youve captured her imagination by giving her locks of your hair, rings, toys, trinkets, knickknacks, little presents, flowers, and candiesthings that can really influence an impressionable young person. Youve connived to steal my daughters heart, making her stubborn and harsh instead of obedient (like she should be).And, my gracious duke, if she wont agree to marry Demetrius right now, I ask you to let me exercise the right that all fathers have in Athens. Since she belongs to me, I can do what I want with heras the law says: I can either make her marry Demetriusor have her killed.	Full of vexation come I with complaint Against my child, my daughter Hermia. Stand forth, Demetrius.My noble lord, This man hath my consent to marry her. Stand forth, Lysander.And my gracious duke, This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child. Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, And interchanged love tokens with my child. Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung With feigning voice verses of feigning love, And stol'n the impression of her fantasy With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits, Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeatsmessengers Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth. With cunning hast thou filched my daughters heart, Turned her obedience (which is due to me) To stubborn harshness.And, my gracious duke, Be it so she will not here before your grace Consent to marry with Demetrius, I beg the ancient privilege of Athens. As she is mine, I may dispose of her Which shall be either to this gentleman Or to her deathaccording to our law Immediately provided in that case.
What do you have to say for yourself, Hermia? Think carefully, pretty girl. You should think of your father as a god, since hes the one who gave you your beauty. To him, youre like a figure that hes sculpted out of wax, and he has the power to keep that figure intact or to disfigure it. Demetrius is an admirable man.	What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid: To you your father should be as a god, One that composed your beauties, yea, and one To whom you are but as a form in wax, By him imprinted and within his power To leave the figure or disfigure it. Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
So is Lysander.	So is Lysander.
Youre right, Lysanders admirable too. But since your father doesnt want him to marry you, you have to consider Demetrius to be the better man.	In himself he is. But in this kind, wanting your fathers voice, The other must be held the worthier.
I wish my father could see them with my eyes.	I would my father looked but with my eyes.
No, you must see them as your father sees them.	Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
Your grace, please forgive me. I dont know what makes me think I can say this, and I dont know if speaking my mind to such a powerful and noble person as yourself will damage my reputation for modesty. But please, tell me the worst thing that could happen to me if I refuse to marry Demetrius.	I do entreat your grace to pardon me. I know not by what power I am made bold Nor how it may concern my modesty In such a presence here to plead my thoughts, But I beseech your grace that I may know The worst that may befall me in this case, If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
Youll either be executed or youll never see another man again. So think carefully about what you want, beautiful Hermia. Consider how young you are, and question your feelings. Then decide whether you could stand to be a nun, wearing a priestesss habit and caged up in a cloister forever, living your entire life without a husband or children, weakly chanting hymns to the cold and virginal goddess of the moon. People who can restrain their passions and stay virgins forever are holy. But although a virgin priestess might be rewarded in heaven, a married woman is happier on Earth. A married woman is like a rose who is picked and made into a beautiful perfume, while a priestess just withers away on the stem.	Either to die the death or to abjure Forever the society of men. Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires. Know of your youth. Examine well your blood Whether, if you yield not to your fathers choice, You can endure the livery of a nun, For aye to be in shady cloister mewed, To live a barren sister all your life, Chanting faint hymns to the cold, fruitless moon. Thrice-blessd they that master so their blood To undergo such maiden pilgrimage. But earthlier happy is the rose distilled Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn, Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.
Id rather wither away than give up my virginity to someone I dont love.	So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, Ere I will yield my virgin patent up Unto his lordship, whose unwishd yoke My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
Take some time to think about this. By the time of the next new moonthe day when Hippolyta and I will be marriedbe ready either to be executed for disobeying your father, to marry Demetrius as your father wishes, or to take a vow to spend the rest of your life as a virgin priestess of the moon goddess.	Take time to pause, and by the next new moon The sealing day betwixt my love and me For everlasting bond of fellowship Upon that day either prepare to die For disobedience to your fathers will, Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would, Or on Dianas altar to protest For aye austerity and single life.
Please give in, sweet Hermia.And Lysander, stop acting like shes yours. Ive got more of a right to her than you do.	Relent, sweet HermiaAnd, Lysander, yield Thy crazd title to my certain right.
Her father loves you, Demetrius. So why dont you marry him and let me have Hermia?	You have her fathers love, Demetrius. Let me have Hermias. Do you marry him.
Its true, rude Lysander, I do love him. Thats why Im giving him my daughter. Shes mine, and Im giving her to Demetrius.	Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love, And what is mine my love shall render him. And she is mine, and all my right of her I do estate unto Demetrius.
(to THESEUS) My lord, Im just as noble and rich as he is. I love Hermia more than he does. My prospects are as good as his, if not better. And beautiful Hermia loves mewhich is more important than all those other things Im bragging about. Why shouldnt I be able to marry her? Demetriusand Ill say this to his facecourted Nedars daughter, Helena, and made her fall in love with him. That sweet lady, Helena, loves devoutly. She adores this horrible and unfaithful man.	(to THESEUS) I am, my lord, as well derived as he, As well possessed. My love is more than his. My fortunes every way as fairly ranked, (If not with vantage) as Demetrius'. Andwhich is more than all these boasts can be I am beloved of beauteous Hermia. Why should not I then prosecute my right? Demetrius, Ill avouch it to his head, Made love to Nedars daughter, Helena, And won her soul. And she, sweet lady, dotes, Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
I have to admit Ive heard something about that, and meant to ask Demetrius about it, but I was too busy with personal matters and it slipped my mind.Anyway, Demetrius and Egeus, both of you, come with me. I want to say a few things to you in private.As for you, beautiful Hermia, get ready to do what your father wants, because otherwise the law says that you must die or become a nun, and theres nothing I can do about that.Come with me, Hippolyta. How are you, my love?Demetrius and Egeus, come with us. I want you to do some things for our wedding, and I also want to discuss something that concerns you both.	I must confess that I have heard so much And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof, But being overfull of self-affairs, My mind did lose it.But, Demetrius, come. And come, Egeus. You shall go with me. I have some private schooling for you both. For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself To fit your fancies to your fathers will, Or else the law of Athens yields you up (Which by no means we may extenuate) To death, or to a vow of single life. Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love? Demetrius and Egeus, go along. I must employ you in some business Against our nuptial and confer with you Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
Were following you not only because it is our duty, but also because we want to.	With duty and desire we follow you.
Whats going on, my love? Why are you so pale? Why have your rosy cheeks faded so quickly?	How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale? How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
Probably because my cheeks' roses needed rain, which I could easily give them with all the tears in my eyes.	Belike for want of rain, which I could well Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
Oh, honey! Listen, in books they say that true love always faces obstacles. Either the lovers have different social standings	Ay me! For aught that I could ever read, Could ever hear by tale or history, The course of true love never did run smooth. But either it was different in blood
Oh, what an obstacle that would be! Imagine being too high on the social ladder, and falling in love with someone beneath you.	O cross! Too high to be enthralled to low.
Or else they were very different ages	Or else misgraffd in respect of years
How awful! Being too old to marry someone young.	O spite! Too old to be engaged to young.
Or else their guardians and advisors said no	Or else it stood upon the choice of friends
What hell, to have your love life determined by someone else!	O hell, to choose love by anothers eyes!
Or, even if the lovers are a good match, their love might be ruined by war, death, or sickness, so that the affair only lasts an instant. Their time together might be as fleeting as a shadow or as short as a dream, lasting only as long as it takes a lightning bolt to flash across the sky. Before you can say look, its gone. Thats how intense things like love are quickly destroyed.	Or, if there were a sympathy in choice, War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, Making it momentary as a sound, Swift as a shadow, short as any dream, Brief as the lightning in the collied night; That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth, And ere a man hath power to say Behold! The jaws of darkness do devour it up. So quick bright things come to confusion.
If true lovers are always thwarted, then it must be a rule of fate. So lets try to be patient as we deal with our problem. Its as normal a part of love as dreams, sighs, wishes, and tears.	If then true lovers have been ever crossed, It stands as an edict in destiny. Then let us teach our trial patience, Because it is a customary cross, As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs, Wishes and tears, poor fancys followers.
Thats the right attitude. So, listen, Hermia. I have an aunt who is a widow, whos very rich and doesnt have any children. She lives about twenty miles from Athens, and she thinks of me as a son. I could marry you there, gentle Hermia, where the strict laws of Athens cant touch us. So heres the plan. If you love me, sneak out of your fathers house tomorrow night and meet me in the forest a few miles outside of town.	A good persuasion. Therefore, hear me, Hermia. I have a widow aunt, a dowager Of great revenue, and she hath no child. From Athens is her house remote seven leagues, And she respects me as her only son. There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee. And to that place the sharp Athenian law Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then, Steal forth thy fathers house tomorrow night. And in the wood, a league without the town
	To do observance to a morn of May There will I stay for thee.
Oh, Lysander, I swear Ill be there tomorrow. I swear by Cupids strongest bow and his best gold-tipped arrow, by the Goddess of Loves innocent doves, by everything that ties lovers together, by the bonfire where Queen Dido burned herself to death when her lover Aeneas jilted her, and by all the promises that men have broken (and men have broken more promises than women have ever made). I give you my word, I will meet you at that spot tomorrow.	My good Lysander! I swear to thee by Cupids strongest bow, By his best arrow with the golden head, By the simplicity of Venus' doves, By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen When the false Troyan under sail was seen, By all the vows that ever men have broke (In number more than ever women spoke), In that same place thou hast appointed me, Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.
Keep your promise, my love. Look, here comes Helena.	Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.
Hello, beautiful Helena! Where are you going?	Godspeed, fair Helena! Whither away?
Did you just call me beautiful? Take it back. Youre the beautiful one as far as Demetrius is concerned. Oh, youre so lucky! Your eyes are like stars, and your voice is more musical than a larks song is to a shepherd in the springtime. Sickness is contagiousI wish beauty were contagious too! I would catch your good looks before I left. My ear would be infected by your voice, my eye by your eye, and my tongue would come down with a bad case of your melodious speech. If the world were mine, Id give it all upeverything except Demetriusto be you.	Call you me fair? That fair again unsay. Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair! Your eyes are lodestars, and your tongues sweet air More tunable than lark to shepherds ear When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. Sickness is catching. Oh, were favor so, Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go. My ear should catch your voice. My eye, your eye. My tongue should catch your tongues sweet melody. Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, The rest Id give to be to you translated.
	You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.
I frown at him, but he still loves me.	I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
Oh, if only my smiles could inspire love as effectively as your frowns!	Oh, that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
I curse him, but he loves me.	I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
If only my prayers could inspire that kind of affection!	Oh, that my prayers could such affection move!
The more I hate him, the more he follows me around.	The more I hate, the more he follows me.
The more I love him, the more he hates me.	The more I love, the more he hateth me.
Its not my fault he acts like that, Helena.	His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
Thats true, its your beautys fault. I wish I had a fault like that!	None, but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!
Dont worry. He wont see my face ever again. Lysander and I are running away from here. Before I saw Lysander, Athens seemed like paradise to me. But Lysanders so attractive that hes turned heaven into hell!	Take comfort. He no more shall see my face. Lysander and myself will fly this place. Before the time I did Lysander see Seemed Athens as a paradise to me. Oh, then, what graces in my love do dwell, That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!
Helena, well tell you about our secret plan. Tomorrow night, when the moon shines on the water and decorates the grass with tiny beads of pearly light (the time of night that always hides runaway lovers), we plan to sneak out of Athens.	Helen, to you our minds we will unfold. Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold Her silver visage in the watery glass, Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass (A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal), Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.
(to HELENA) In the woods where you and I used to lounge around on the pale primroses, telling each other sweet secretsthats where Lysander and I will meet.	(to HELENA) And in the wood where often you and I Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie, Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
	And thence from Athens turn away our eyes To seek new friends and stranger companies. Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us. And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius! Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.
I will, my Hermia.	I will, my Hermia.
	As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!
Its amazing how much happier some people are than others! People throughout Athens think Im as beautiful as Hermia. But so what? Demetrius doesnt think so, and thats all that matters. He refuses to admit what everyone else knows. But even though hes making a mistake by obsessing over Hermia so much, Im also making a mistake, since I obsess over him. Love can make worthless things beautiful. When were in love, we dont see with our eyes but with our minds. Thats why paintings of Cupid, the god of love, always show him as blind. And love doesnt have good judgment eitherCupid, has wings and no eyes, so hes bound to be reckless and hasty. Thats why they say love is a child. because it makes such bad choices. Just as boys like to play games by telling lies, Cupid breaks his promises all the time. Before Demetrius ever saw Hermia, he showered me with promises and swore hed be mine forever.	How happy some o'er other some can be! Through Athens I am thought as fair as she. But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so. He will not know what all but he do know. And as he errs, doting on Hermias eyes, So I, admiring of his qualities. Things base and vile, holding no quantity, Love can transpose to form and dignity. Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind. And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. Nor hath Loves mind of any judgment taste Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste. And therefore is Love said to be a child, Because in choice he is so oft beguiled. As waggish boys in game themselves forswear, So the boy Love is perjured everywhere. For ere Demetrius looked on Hermias eyne, He hailed down oaths that he was only mine.
	So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt. I will go tell him of fair Hermias flight. Then to the wood will he tomorrow night Pursue her. And for this intelligence If I have thanks, it is a dear expense. But herein mean I to enrich my pain, To have his sight thither and back again.
Is everyone here?	Is all our company here?
You should call their names generally,Bottom means individually, not generally. Bottom frequently makes mistakes with words.generally, one person at a time, in the order in which their names appear on this piece of paper.	You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.
This is a list of the names of all the men in Athens who are good enough to act in the play were going to perform for the duke and duchess on their wedding night.	Here is the scroll of every mans name which is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his wedding day at night.
First, Peter Quince, tell us what the play is about, then read the names of the actors, and then shut up.	First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.
All right. Our play is called A Very Tragic Comedy About the Horrible Deaths of Pyramus and Thisbe.	Marry, our play is The most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe.
Let me tell you, its a great piece of work, and veryfunny.Now, Peter Quince, call the names of the actors on the list. Men, gather around him.	A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll.Masters, spread yourselves.
Answer when I call your name.Nick Bottom, the weaver?	Answer as I call you.Nick Bottom, the weaver?
Here. Tell me which part Im going to play, then go on.	Ready. Name what part I am for and proceed.
You, Nick Bottom, have been cast as Pyramus.	You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
Hello, spirit! Where are you going?	How now, spirit? Whither wander you?
I go over hills and valleys, through bushes and thorns, over parks and fenced-in spaces, through water and fire. I wander everywhere faster than the moon revolves around the Earth. I work for Titania, the Fairy Queen, and organize fairy dances for her in the grass. The cowslip flowers are her bodyguards. Youll see that their petals have spots on themthose are rubies, fairy gifts. Their sweet smells come from those little freckles. Now I have to go find some dewdrops and hang a pearl earring on every cowslip flower. Goodbye, you dumb old spirit. Ive got to go. The queen and her elves will be here soon.	Over hill, over dale, Thorough bush, thorough brier, Over park, over pale, Thorough flood, thorough fire. I do wander everywhere Swifter than the moons sphere. And I serve the fairy queen To dew her orbs upon the green. The cowslips tall her pensioners be. In their gold coats spots you see. Those be rubies, fairy favors. In those freckles live their savors. I must go seek some dewdrops here And hang a pearl in every cowslips ear. Farewell, thou lob of spirits. Ill be gone. Our queen and all our elves come here anon.
The kings having a party here tonight. Just make sure the queen doesnt come anywhere near him, because King Oberon is extremely angry. Hes furious because she stole an adorable boy from an Indian king. Shes never kidnapped such a darling human child before, and Oberons jealous. He wants the child for himself, to accompany him on his wanderings through the wild forests. But the queen refuses to hand the boy over to Oberon. Instead, she puts flowers in the boys hair and makes a fuss over him.	The king doth keep his revels here tonight. Take heed the queen come not within his sight. For Oberon is passing fell and wrath Because that she, as her attendant hath A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king. She never had so sweet a changeling. And jealous Oberon would have the child Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild. But she perforce withholds the lovd boy, Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
Come, dance in a circle and sing a fairy song, and then go off for a while to do your work. Some of you will kill the worms infesting the rosebuds, some of you will fight with bats to get their leathery wings, so we can make coats for my small elves. Some of you will keep that loud owl away, the one that hoots and wonders every night at us dainty fairies. Sing me to sleep now, and then go off to do your duties and let me rest.	Come now, a roundel and a fairy song. Then for the third part of a minute, hence Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, Some war with reremice for their leathern wings To make my small elves coats, and some keep back The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep. Then to your offices and let me rest.
(singing) Snakes with forked tongues, And porcupines, dont be seen. Deadly lizards, dont be mean. Dont come near our fairy queen.	(sings) You spotted snakes with double tongue, Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen. Newts and blindworms, do no wrong. Come not near our fairy queen.
(singing) Nightingale, melodiously Sing our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Let no harm Or spell or charm Come near our lovely lady. Say good night with a lullaby.	(sing) Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Never harm Nor spell nor charm Come our lovely lady nigh. So good night, with lullaby.
(singing) Spiders with your webs, stay away. You long-legged things, begone!	(sings) Weaving spiders, come not here. Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence!
Are we all here?	Are we all met?
Right on time. This is the perfect place to rehearse. This clearing will be the stage, and this hawthorn bush will be our dressing room. Lets put on our play exactly as well perform it for the duke.	Pat, pat. And heres a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.
Peter Quince	Peter Quince
What is it, jolly Bottom?	What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never work. First of all, Pyramus has to take out a sword to kill himself, which the ladies in the audience wont be able to stand. What should we do about that?	There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?
By God, thats a real problem, its true.	By 'r lakin, a parlous fear.
I think well have to leave out all the killing, come to think of it.	I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
Not at all! Ive got a plan that will fix everything. Write me a prologue that I can recite to the audience before the play starts. Ill tell them that we wont hurt anyone with our swords, and that Pyramus isnt really dead. And to make it even clearer, we can tell them that Im playing Pyramus but Im not really Pyramusreally, Im Bottom the weaver. Thatll keep them from being afraid.	Not a whit. I have a device to make all well. Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and that Pyramus is not killed indeed. And for the more better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of fear.
I wonder if Titania is awake yet, and if she is, I wonder what the first thing she saw was. Whatever it is, she must be completely in love with it now.	I wonder if Titania be awaked. Then, what it was that next came in her eye, Which she must dote on in extremity.
	What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
My mistress Titania is in love with a monster. While she was sleeping in her bed of flowers, a group of bumbling idiots, rough workmen from Athens, got together nearby to rehearse some play they plan to perform on Theseuss wedding day. The stupidest one, who played Pyramus in their play, finished his scene and went to sit in the bushes to wait for his next cue. I took that opportunity to stick a donkeys head on him. When it was time for him to go back onstage and talk to his Thisbe, he came out of the bushes and everyone saw him. His friends ran away as fast as ducks scatter when they hear a hunters gunshot. One of them was so frightened when he heard my footsteps that he yelled, Murder! and called for help from Athens. They were all so afraid that they completely lost their common sense. They started to become scared of inanimate objects, terrified by the thorns and briars that catch at their clothing and pull off their sleeves and hats. I led them on in this frightened, distracted state, and left sweet	My mistress with a monster is in love. Near to her close and consecrated bower, While she was in her dull and sleeping hour, A crew of patches, rude mechanicals That work for bread upon Athenian stalls, Were met together to rehearse a play Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day. The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, Who Pyramus presented in their sport, Forsook his scene and entered in a brake, When I did him at this advantage take, An asss nole I fixd on his head. Anon his Thisbe must be answerd, And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy, As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye, Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort, Rising and cawing at the guns report, Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky So at his sight away his fellows fly; And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls.
(to BOTTOM) Come over here and sit down on this flowery bed while I caress those lovable cheeks. Ill put roses on your silky, smooth head and kiss your big, beautiful ears, my gentle darling.	(to BOTTOM) Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed While I thy amiable cheeks do coy, And stick musk roses in thy sleek, smooth head, And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
Wheres Peaseblossom?	Wheres Peaseblossom?
Here.	Ready.
Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Wheres Monsieur Cobweb?	Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Wheres Monsieur Cobweb?
Here.	Ready.
Monsieur Cobweb, sir, get out your weapons and kill me a striped bumblebee on a thistle, and bring me its honey. Dont tire yourself out, monsieur. Oh, and monsieur, be careful not to break the honey-sac. Id hate to see you drowned in honey, sir.	Monsieur Cobweb, good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle. And, good monsieur, bring me the honey bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the action, monsieur. And good monsieur, have a care the honey bag break not. I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey bag, signor.
	
Here.	Ready.
Have you sent anyone to Bottoms house? Has he come home yet?	Have you sent to Bottoms house? Is he come home yet?
No ones heard from him. Im sure hes been kidnapped.	He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.
If he doesnt show up, the play is ruined. It wont go on. Will it?	If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not forward. Doth it?
No, it would be impossible. Hes the only person in Athens who can play Pyramus.	It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.
Definitely. Hes quite simply the smartest working-man in Athens.	No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens.
Yes, and the best looking too. And his voice is the paramour of sweetness.	Yea, and the best person too. And he is a very paramour for a sweet voice.
You mean paragon. A paramourparamour = loverparamour is something bad.	You must say paragon. A paramour is, God bless us, a thing of naught.
The dukes leaving the temple. Two or three more lords and ladies have been married too. If wed been able to put on our play, we would have had it made.	Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all been made men.
Oh that great, funny guy, Bottom! He would have gotten a pension of six pence a day for his whole life. Six pence a day wouldve been forced on him. Ill be damned if the duke wouldnt have given him six pence a day for playing Pyramus.	O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life. He could not have scaped sixpence a day. An the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, Ill be hanged.
These lovers are saying some strange things, Theseus.	'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.
Yes, strangeand totally made up too. Ill never believe any of these old legends or fairy tales. Lovers and madmen hallucinate about things that sane people just cant understand. Lunatics, lovers, and poets all are ruled by their overactive imaginations. some people think they see devils and monsters everywhereand theyre lunatics. Lovers are just as crazy, and think a dark-skinned gypsy is the most gorgeous woman in the world. Poets are always looking around like theyre having a fit, confusing the mundane with the otherworldly, and describing things in their writing that simply dont exist. All these people have such strong imaginations that, when they feel happy, they assume a god or some other supernatural being is bringing that happiness to them. Or if theyre afraid of something at night, they look at the shrubbery and imagine its a wild bear!	More strange than true. I never may believe These antique fables nor these fairy toys. Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend More than cool reason ever comprehends. The lunatic, the lover, and the poet Are of imagination all compact. One sees more devils than vast hell can hold That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic, Sees Helens beauty in a brow of Egypt. The poets eye, in fine frenzy rolling, Doth glance from heaven to Earth, from Earth to heaven. And as imagination bodies forth The forms of things unknown, the poets pen Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing A local habitation and a name. Such tricks hath strong imagination, That if it would but apprehend some joy, It comprehends some bringer of that joy. Or in the night, imagining some fear, How easy is a bush supposed a bear!
But the story that these lovers are telling, and the fact that they all saw and heard exactly the same things, make me think theres more going on here than imaginary fantasies. Their story is bizarre and astounding, but its solid and consistent. 	But all the story of the night told over, And all their minds transfigured so together, More witnesseth than fancys images And grows to something of great constancy, But, howsoever, strange and admirable. 
(holding a letter) According to this letter, DonDon is the Italian equivalent of Sir or Lord.Don Pedro of Aragon and his army are coming to Messina tonight.	I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Aragon comes this night to Messina.
He must be very near by now. When I left him, he was less than nine miles from here.	He is very near by this. He was not three leagues off when I left him.
How many noblemen were killed in the battle you just fought?	How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?
Not many, and no one important.	But few of any sort, and none of name.
A victory in battle is twice as victorious when all the soldiers return home safely. This letter also says that Don Pedro has given honors to a young man from Florence named Claudio.	A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full numbers. I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young Florentine called Claudio.
Claudio deserves to be honored, and Don Pedro has rewarded him accordingly. Claudio has done more than anyone would expect of a man his age. He looks like a lamb but fights like a lion. He has so greatly exceeded all expectations that I cant even describe all hes done.	Much deserved on his part, and equally remembered by Don Pedro. He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. He hath indeed better bettered expectation than you must expect of me to tell you how.
He has an uncle here in Messina who will be glad to hear this news.	He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.
I have delivered some letters to his uncle, and he seemed very happy. He got so emotional that he actually looked like he was in pain.	I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in himeven so much that joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of bitterness.
Did he start weeping?	Did he break out into tears?
Yes, heavily.	In great measure.
Thats a very natural display of affection. Theres no face more sincere than one washed in tears. And its definitely better to cry because youre happy than laugh because youre sad!	A kind overflow of kindness. There are no faces truer than those that are so washed. How much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping!
Please tell me, has Signior MontantoMontanto is a fencing term for an upward thrust.Montanto returned from battle?	I pray you, is Signor Montanto returned from the wars or no?
I dont know anyone with that name, ma'am. There was no Signior Montanto in our army.	I know none of that name, lady. There was none such in the army of any sort.
Who are you talking about, niece?	What is he that you ask for, niece?
My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.	My cousin means Signor Benedick of Padua.
Oh, yes, Benedick has returned and is as cheerful as ever.	Oh, hes returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.
BenedickThe exact meaning of this story is unclear, but it depicts Benedick as a braggart and a fool.Benedick once put up a public notice in Messina challenging Cupid to an archery match. My uncles jester accepted the contest on Cupids behalf but used toy arrows at the shooting match. But tell me, how many men did he kill and eat in this battle? I promised him I would eat anyone he killed.	He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged Cupid at the flight, and my uncles Fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for Cupid and challenged him at the bird-bolt. I pray you, how many hath he killed and eaten in these wars? But how many hath he killed? For indeed I promised to eat all of his killing.
For Gods sake, Beatrice, youre criticizing Signior Benedick too heavily. But Im sure hell get even with you.	Faith, niece, you tax Signor Benedick too much, but hell be meet with you, I doubt it not.
Signior Benedick served well in the war, my lady.	He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
You had rotten food, and he helped you eat it. Hes a very brave eaterhe has a strong stomach.	You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it. He is a very valiant trencherman. He hath an excellent stomach.
Hes a good soldier too, lady.	And a good soldier too, lady.
Hes a good soldier to a lady? Well then, what is he to a lord?	And a good soldier to a lady, but what is he to a lord?
Hes a lord to a lord and a man to a man. He is positively stuffed with honorable virtues.	A lord to a lord, a man to a man, stuffed with all honorable virtues.
Absolutelyhe is stuffed, like a dummy. As for what hes stuffed withwell, nobodys perfect.	It is so indeed. He is no less than a stuffed man. But for the stuffingwell, we are all mortal.
Please dont take my niece the wrong way, sir. Benedick and Beatrice have been waging a war of wits between themselves. Whenever they meet, theres a little battle.	You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a kind of merry war betwixt Signor Benedick and her. They never meet but theres a skirmish of wit between them.
And I always win. The last time we fought, he was so dazed by the end that he wasnt much smarter than his horse. So tell me, who is he hanging around with these days? Every month he has a new best friend.	Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our last conflict four of his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one, so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse, for it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable creature. Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new sworn brother.
Is that possible?	Is t possible?
Its entirely possible. Hes incredibly ficklehis affection changes faster than the latest fashions.	Very easily possible. He wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat; it ever changes with the next block.
I can see you dont like this gentleman.	I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
No, absolutely not. But please tell me, whos his best friend? Isnt there some new swaggering young ruffian who will happily go to hell with Benedick?	No. An he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is his companion? Is there no young squarer now that will make a voyage with him to the devil?
He spends most of his time with the good, noble Claudio.	He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.
Oh God, Benedick will plague him like a disease! Benedick is an infection thats easy to catch but hard to get rid ofand hell drive you crazy once youve been infected. God help Claudio! If hes caught the Benedick, hell lose all his money before hes cured.	O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease! He is sooner caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God help the noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it will cost him a thousand pound ere a be cured.
Im going to make sure I stay on your good side, lady.	I will hold friends with you, lady.
Do that, my friend.	Do, good friend.
You will never fall victim to Benedicks charms, my niece.	You will never run mad, niece.
No, not until we see a hot January.	No, not till a hot January.
Don Pedro is here.	Don Pedro is approached.
My dear Signior Leonato, hosting my whole army is such a huge burden, but you accept itand mewith open arms. Most people choose to avoid trouble, but you run to it.	Good Signor Leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? The fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
You are never trouble to this house, your Grace. Its comforting when trouble departs. But when you leave, you take happiness with you and leave sorrow in its place.	Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace, for trouble being gone, comfort should remain, but when you depart from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.
You take up your duties too cheerfully. (turning to HERO) This must be your daughter.	You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this is your daughter.
Thats what her mother always tells me.	Her mother hath many times told me so.
Did you doubt that she was your daughter, since you had to ask her mother?	Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?
(teasing) Of course not, Signior Benedick. You were only a child when my daughter was born, and not yet old enough to seduce my wife.	Signor Benedick, no, for then were you a child.
Ah, he got you back, Benedick! Leonato clearly knows your reputation with women. Seriously, though, the lady resembles Leonato so much that there can be no doubt about who her father is. Congratulations, lady: you resemble a most honorable man.	You have it full, Benedick. We may guess by this what you are, being a man. Truly, the lady fathers herself.Be happy, lady, for you are like an honorable father.
Well, even if he is her father, Im sure she wouldnt want to have the head of the old man on her shoulders!	If Signor Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina, as like him as she is.
Im amazed youre still talking, Signior Benedick. No ones listening to you.	I wonder that you will still be talking, Signor Benedick. Nobody marks you.
Look, its my dear Lady Disdain! Arent you dead yet?	What, my dear Lady Disdain! Are you yet living?
How could disdain die when youre here? When youre around, even Lady Courtesy becomes Lady Disdain.	Is it possible disdain should die while she hath such meet food to feed it as Signor Benedick? Courtesy itself must convert to disdain if you come in her presence.
That makes Lady Courtesy a traitor. All ladies love me, except you. Its too bad Im so hard-hearted, because I really dont love anyone.	Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I am loved of all ladies, only you excepted. And I would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard heart, for truly I love none.
Women are lucky, then. You would make a nasty suitor. Thankfully, I feel the same way you do. I have no need for romance. I would rather listen to my dog bark at a crow than hear a man swear that he loves me.	A dear happiness to women. They would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor. I thank God and my cold blood I am of your humor for that. I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man swear he loves me.
Well, I hope you stay in that frame of mind or some poor man will end up with his face all scratched up.	God keep your Ladyship still in that mind, so some gentle- man or other shall scape a predestinate scratched face.
If he has a face like yours, a good scratching couldnt make him look any worse.	Scratching could not make it worse an twere such a face as yours were.
Listen to you, instructing me like a parrot would.	Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
Id rather be a squawking bird than an animal like you.	A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
I wish my horse moved as fast as your mouth and was as tireless. Thats itIm done.	I would my horse had the speed of your tongue and so good a continuer. But keep your way, i' Gods name. I have done.
You always slip out of the argument like this. I know you from before.	You always end with a jades trick. I know you of old.
And thats everything, Leonato.Claudio, Benedickmy dear friend Leonato has invited you all to stay here at Messina. I told him well stay for at least a month, and he says that he hopes well stay longer. I think hes actually serious, and not just being polite.	That is the sum of all, Leonato.Signior Claudio and Signior Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear he is no hypocrite but prays from his heart.
I am being serious, my lord. (to DON JOHN) I welcome you here as well. Now that you and your brother have made friends again, I owe you the same allegiance I owe Don Pedro.	If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn. (to DON JOHN) Let me bid you welcome, my lord. Being reconciled to the Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.
Thank you. Im not a man who talks a lot, but I thank you.	I thank you. I am not of many words, but I thank you.
If it pleases you, your highness, will you lead us all inside?	Please it your Grace lead on?
Give me your hand, Leonato. We will go in together.	Your hand, Leonato. We will go together.
Benedick, did you notice Signior Leonatos daughter?	Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?
I saw her, but I didnt notice her.	I noted her not, but I looked on her.
Isnt she a well-mannered young lady?	Is she not a modest young lady?
Do you want my true opinion? Or do you want me to criticize her like I do all women?	Do you question me as an honest man should do, for my simple true judgment? Or would you have me speak after my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex?
No, please, speak seriously.	No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
Well, it seems to me that she is too short to be praised highly, too dark to be praised fairly, and too small to be praised greatly. I can only say this about her: if she looked different than she does, she would be ugly, and since she cant be anything but herself, I dont like her.	Why, i' faith, methinks shes too low for a high praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise. Only this commendation I can afford her, that were she other than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is, I do not like her.
You think Im kidding. Please tell me seriously what you think of her.	Thou thinkest I am in sport. I pray thee tell me truly how thou likst her.
Are you thinking of buying her? Is that why youre asking?	Would you buy her, that you enquire after her?
Would it even be possible to buy a jewel as rare and precious as Hero?	Can the world buy such a jewel?
Yes, and you could buy a case to put it in, too. But tell me, are you speaking seriously? Or are you just teasing? If Im going to sing along with you, I need to know what key youre singing in.	Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this with a sad brow? Or do you play the flouting jack, to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a man take you to go in the song?
I think shes the most wonderful woman Ive ever laid eyes on.	In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I looked on.
Im still young enough to see without glasses, and I dont see what youre talking about. If her cousin Beatrice didnt have such a nasty temper, shed be so much more beautiful than Hero that it would be like comparing May to December. But, hey, this doesnt mean youre looking to get married, does it?	I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter. Theres her cousin, an she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of December. But I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have you?
Even if I had sworn never to marry, I wouldnt trust myself to keep that promise if Hero would marry me.	I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the contrary, if Hero would be my wife.
Whats going on these days? Isnt there one man left in the world who knows not to take a wife? Shes just going to cheat on him. Will I never see a sixty-year old bachelor again or will all men be swindled into marriage while theyre young? Go ahead, then, if you have to yoke yourself to marriage, like an ox carrying his load, and throw away your free time. Look, Don Pedro has come back for you.	Is t come to this? In faith, hath not the world one man but he will wear his cap with suspicion? Shall I never see a bachelor of three-score again? Go to, i' faith, an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh away Sundays. Look, Don Pedro is returned to seek you.
What secrets between you have kept you from following us to Leonatos?	What secret hath held you here that you followed not to Leonatos?
Your highness will have to force me to tell.	I would your grace would constrain me to tell.
Your loyalty to me requires you to tell me what youve been talking about.	I charge thee on thy allegiance.
Look, Claudio, I can keep secrets like a mute; I want you to know that. But I owe Don Pedro my allegiancelook, I have to tell him(to DON PEDRO) Claudio is in love. With whom? Thats what youre supposed to ask me next, your Grace. Look how short the answer iswith Hero, Leonatos short daughter.	You hear, Count Claudio? I can be secret as a dumb man, I would have you think so, but on my allegiancemark you this, on my allegiance(to DON PEDRO) he is in love. With who? Now, that is your Graces part. Mark how short his answer is: with Hero, Leonatos short daughter.
If you say so.	If this were so, so were it uttered.
Listen to him deny it, like that man in the old tale Mr. Fox: It isnt true and wasnt true and God forbid it should be so.	Like the old tale, my lord: It is not so nor twas not so but, indeed, God forbid it should be so.
Unless my feelings change very soon, I have to admit its true.	If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.
Its good if you love Hero, because shes worthy of your love.	Amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well worthy.
Youre trying to trick me, my lord.	You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.
I swear, Im telling you what I honestly think.	By my troth, I speak my thought.
And I swear I spoke honestly to BenedickI am in love with Hero.	And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.
And I swear all up and down I spoke honestly when I said that this was a horrible idea.	And by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.
I feel that I love her.	That I love her, I feel.
I know that she is worthy of that love.	That she is worthy, I know.
I, on the other hand, dont feel how she could be loved and dont know how she could be worthy. Even fire cant melt that opinion out of me. You could burn me at the stake, and Id still think this.	That I neither feel how she should be loved nor know how she should be worthy is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me. I will die in it at the stake.
You never did believe in the power of beauty.	Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty.
Or in the power of reason.	And never could maintain his part but in the force of his will.
I was conceived by a woman, and I thank her very much for all her effort. And then she brought me up, and I thank her for that, too. But all the other women will have to forgive me for not being willing to be made a fool ofcheated on by a wife. I dont want to insult any particular woman by doubting and mistrusting her, so Ill just avoid them all. And the conclusion of this is that Ill live as a bachelorand, with the money I save, dress better.	That a woman conceived me, I thank her. That she brought me up, I likewise give her most humble thanks. But that I will have a recheat winded in my forehead or hang my bugle in an invisible baldrick, all women shall pardon me. Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the right to trust none. And the fine is, for the which I may go the finer, I will live a bachelor.
I swear, before I die Im going to see you sick with love.	I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
With anger, with fever, or with hunger, sure, my friend, but never sick with love. If you can prove that Ill ever be so in love that I cant be brought to my senses with a good round of beers, you can pluck out my eyes with a love-poets pen and hang me on a brothels door where the picture of blind Cupid usually goes.	With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord, not with love. Prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-makers pen and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of blind Cupid.
Ill be sure to remember this fuss youve made, in case you ever do fall in love. Thatll be news.	Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt prove a notable argument.
If I ever change my mind, you can use me for target practice. And whoever hits the bulls eye gets to be a hero.	If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder and called Adam.
Well, time will tell. Even the most savage bull is eventually domesticated.	Well, as time shall try. In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.
Maybe the bull is, but if I am ever domesticated, you can take that bulls horns and put them right on my forehead, as my wife is sure to cuckold me soon enough. You might as well hang a big sign with enormous lettering around my neck. But instead of it saying Horse for hire, it will say Take a look at Benedick, the married man.	The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible Benedick bear it, pluck off the bulls horns and set them in my forehead, and let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they write Here is good horse to hire let them signify under my sign Here you may see Benedick the married man.
If that ever happened, youd go absolutely mad.	If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.
Well, if Cupid hasnt used up all his arrows in Venice, where the courtesans are famous for making men lovesick, hell get you to quiver and shake. Just you wait.	Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.
Thats about as likely as an earthquake.	I look for an earthquake too, then.
Oh, youll soften as time passes. While youre waiting for that to happen, though, hurry to Leonatos. Give him my respects, and tell him Ill definitely be there for dinner, since I know he has gone to great lengths for this meal.	Well, you temporize with the hours. In the meantime, good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonatos. Commend me to him and tell him I will not fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great preparation.
I think I can handle this mission. And so I commit you	I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage, and so I commit you
Into Gods hands. From my house, if I had a house	To the tuition of God. From my house, if I had it
The sixth of July. Sincerely, your loving friend, Benedick.	The sixth of July. Your loving friend, Benedick.
Oh, stop joking around. You know, sometimes you two dress up your conversation with flimsy little bits of wit that dont hold together too well. Before you make funBenedick and Claudio are making fun of the fact that I commit you is, in Shakespeares time, a common way to end a formal letter.fun of everyone else, look at yourselves in the mirror! And with that, Im leaving.	Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your discourse is sometimes guarded with fragments and the guards are but slightly basted on neither. Ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience. And so I leave you.
My lord, you could really help me out now.	My liege, your highness now may do me good.
I am at your service. Just tell me what you want me to do, and however hard it is, youll see that Im eager to do it.	My love is thine to teach. Teach it but how, And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
Does Leonato have a son, my lord?	Hath Leonato any son, my lord?
Hero is his only child, and his only heir. Do you like her, Claudio?	No child but Hero; shes his only heir. Dost thou affect her, Claudio?
Oh, my lord, when we left Messina to fight the war, I looked at Hero with the eyes of a soldier. I liked what I saw, but my mind was so occupied with the rough, violent task ahead of me that there was no chance that like would turn intolove. But now that Im back, the room in my head that I used to fill with war plans has become crowded with soft and delicate feelings. They all lead me to the same thoughthow beautiful young Hero is and how I must have liked her even before I left to fight.	O, my lord, When you went onward on this ended action, I looked upon her with a soldiers eye, That liked but had a rougher task in hand Than to drive liking to the name of love. But now I am returned and that war thoughts Have left their places vacant, in their rooms Come thronging soft and delicate desires, All prompting me how fair young Hero is, Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.
You will become a true lover soon, and exhaust your friends with your endless chatter about your feelings. Look, if you really love the beautiful Hero, enjoy it. I will speak to her and her father about the matter, and Ill convince Leonato to promise Hero to you. Isnt that the reason you told me all this?	Thou wilt be like a lover presently And tire the hearer with a book of words. If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it, And I will break with her and with her father, And thou shalt have her. Was t not to this end That thou beganst to twist so fine a story?
You can see that Im sick with love, and youre taking care of me in just the right way! But I didnt want you to think that Im hasty in my emotions. I was going to explain my feelings with a longer story.	How sweetly you do minister to love, That know loves grief by his complexion! But lest my liking might too sudden seem, I would have salved it with a longer treatise.
Why speak longer than you have to? Thats like building a bridge wider than the river it crosses. Whatever gets the job done is best. You love Hero; thats all I need to know to want to find a remedy. Theyre going to have a costume party with dancing tonight. Ill disguise myself as you and pour out my feelings to Hero, taking her prisoner with the force of my love story. Then Ill talk to her father. And in the end, shes yours! Lets get started right away.	What need the bridge much broader than the flood? The fairest grant is the necessity. Look what will serve is fit. 'Tis once, thou lovest, And I will fit thee with the remedy. I know we shall have reveling tonight. I will assume thy part in some disguise And tell fair Hero I am Claudio, And in her bosom Ill unclasp my heart And take her hearing prisoner with the force And strong encounter of my amorous tale. Then after to her father will I break, And the conclusion is, she shall be thine. In practice let us put it presently.
Hey, brother. Tell me, where is my nephew, your son? Has he taken care of the music?	How now, brother, where is my cousin, your son? Hath he provided this music?
He is taking care of it as we speak. But brother, I have some strange news for you.	He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.
Is it good news?	Are they good?
Well, it seems like good news. A servant of mine overheard the Prince and Claudio talking as they walked through my orchard. The Prince said that he is in love with Hero, your daughter, and that he is going to tell her so at the dance tonight. If he she wants to marry him, too, hes going to find you and ask for her hand immediately.	As the events stamps them, but they have a good cover; they show well outward. The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by a man of mine: the Prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.
Is this servant of yours a smart man?	Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
Hes very bright. Ill get him to come here, and you can ask him yourself.	A good sharp fellow. I will send for him, and question him yourself.
Really, my lord, why are you so excessively sad?	What the goodyear, my lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?
The things that cause my sadness are without limit. Therefore my sadness is without limit.	There is no measure in the occasion that breeds. Therefore the sadness is without limit.
You should listen to reason. Then youd stop being so gloomy.	You should hear reason.
And after I have sat and listened to reason, whats my prize?	And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?
If not an end to your suffering, then at least youll have the means to endure it patiently.	If not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.
Im amazed that youbeing such a moody man yourselfare moralizing about my deadly condition. I cant hide what I am. Ill be sad when I have reason to be sad and wont smile at anybodys jokes. Ill eat when Im hungry and wont wait until its convenient. Ill sleep when Im tired and wont rouse myself for anything. Ill laugh when Im happy and wont flatter and fawn over anyone.	I wonder that thou, being, as thou sayst thou art, born under Saturn, goest about to apply a moral medicine to a mortifying mischief. I cannot hide what I am. I must be sad when I have cause and smile at no mans jests, eat when I have stomach and wait for no mans leisure, sleep when I am drowsy and tend on no mans business, laugh when I am merry and claw no man in his humor.
Sure, but dont do it at full volume until theres no danger in it. Not long ago you challenged and opposed your brother, and it is only very recently that he has forgiven you. You need to act carefully if youre going to stay in his good graces. You have to wait for the appropriate time to let loose.	Yea, but you must not make the full show of this till you may do it without controlment. You have of late stood out against your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself. It is needful that you frame the season for your own harvest.
Wasnt Don John at dinner tonight?	Was not Count John here at supper?
I didnt see him.	I saw him not.
That man always looks so sour! Just looking at him gives me heartburn.	How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see him but I am heartburned an hour after.
He has a very gloomy attitude.	He is of a very melancholy disposition.
It would be excellent if they could make a man halfway between Don John and Benedick. One of them is too much like a painting of a manhe never speaksand the other is too much like a spoiled little boy, always chattering.	He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and Benedick. The one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other too like my ladys eldest son, evermore tattling.
So, the man would talk half as much as Benedick and be half as serious as Don John	Then half Signor Benedicks tongue in Count Johns mouth, and half Count Johns melancholy in Signor Benedicks face
And if he were handsome, agile, and rich, too, he could have any woman in the worldall hed need was her good will.	With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world, if he could get her goodwill.
Really, niece, youll never get a husband if you keep saying such harsh things about people.	By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.
Honestly, she is too ill-tempered.	In faith, shes too curst.
Its arranged. The Count Claudio will marry Leonatos daughter.	It is so. The Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato.
Yes, my lord, but I can spoil it.	Yea, my lord, but I can cross it.
Any obstacle or barrier to Claudios happiness will be like medicine to me. I hate him so much it makes me sick, and whoever can ruin his happiness will make me happy. How will you wreck this marriage?	Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to me. I am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this marriage?
I can only do it by lying, my lord, but I can do it so secretly that no one will suspect me.	Not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me.
Quickly, tell me how.	Show me briefly how.
I think it was a year ago that I told you how much Margaret, Heros servant woman, likes me.	I think I told your lordship a year since how much I am in the favor of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.
I remember.	I remember.
I can arrange it so that at some indecent hour of the night, she looks out Heros bedroom window.	I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to look out at her ladys chamber window.
How will that kill this marriage?	What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?
That part is up to you. Go to the Prince, your brother, and tell him that he has done a terrible thing by matching the renowned Claudiowhom you greatly admirewith such a tainted whore as Hero.	The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to the Prince your brother. Spare not to tell him that he hath wronged his honor in marrying the renowned Claudio, whose estimation do you mightily hold up, to a contaminated stale, such a one as Hero.
Boy!	Boy!
Yes Signior?	Signior?
In my bedroom window there is a book. Go get it and bring it to me here in the orchard.	In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it hither to me in the orchard.
Im already here, sir.	I am here already, sir.
I see that you are here, but Id like you to go there and then come back again.The boy means, It\s as good as done, but Benedick plays as if he takes the boy literally.	I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again.
	man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviors to love, will, after he hath laughed at such shallow follies in others, become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love and such a man is Claudio. I have known when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he rather hear the tabor and the pipe. I have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a good armor, and now will he lie ten nights awake carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography; his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes. May I be so converted and see with these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not.
Margaret, run into the sitting room. Youll find Beatrice there, talking to Claudio and the Prince. Whisper to her that Ursula and I are walking in the orchard and that were talking all about her. Tell her you heard us, and that she should sneak into the arbor where the crisscrossing branches overhead keep the honeysuckles out of the sun. (The same honeysuckles that were once ripened in the sun; theyre like courtiers who rise because the king favors them, then plot to overthrow his Majesty.) She can hide there and eavesdrop on our conversation. This is your job. Do it well, and then leave us.	Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor. There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice Proposing with the Prince and Claudio. Whisper her ear and tell her I and Ursula Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse Is all of her. Say that thou overheardst us, And bid her steal into the pleachd bower Where honeysuckles ripened by the sun Forbid the sun to enter, like favorites Made proud by princes, that advance their pride Against that power that bred it. There will she hide her To listen our propose. This is thy office. Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
Ill make her come right away, I promise you.	Ill make her come, I warrant you, presently.
All right Ursula, as Beatrice arrives, well be walking up and down this alley and speaking about nothing but Benedick. Whenever I mention him, praise him more than any man deserves. Itll be my job to talk about how Benedick is sick with love for Beatrice. Well make our arrows the same way Cupid does: with gossip and rumor.	Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come, As we do trace this alley up and down, Our talk must only be of Benedick. When I do name him, let it be thy part To praise him more than ever man did merit. My talk to thee must be how Benedick Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter Is little Cupids crafty arrow made, That only wounds by hearsay.
Ill stay in Messina until youre married, and then Ill go to Aragon.	I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go I toward Aragon.
Ill go with you, my lord, if youll allow me.	Ill bring you thither, my lord, if youll vouchsafe me.
No, taking you away from your new marriage would be like showing a child a new coat and then not letting him wear it. Ill ask only Benedick to come with me, for from the top of his head to the soles of his feet hes a joker. Hes evaded love once or twice, and since then Cupid doesnt dare to shoot at him. Benedicks heart is like a bell, with his tongue as the clapper: everything his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.	Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it. I will only be bold with Benedick for his company, for from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he is all mirth. He hath twice or thrice cut Cupids bow-string, and the little hangman dare not shoot at him. He hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.
Gentleman, I am not the same man I was before.	Gallants, I am not as I have been.
I agree. I think you seem more serious.	So say I. Methinks you are sadder.
I hope hes in love.	I hope he be in love.
Come off it, man! There isnt a single drop of sincerity in him that could be touched with love. If he looks serious, he must need money.	Hang him, truant! Theres no true drop of blood in him to be truly touched with love. If he be sad, he wants money.
I have a toothacheToothache was an ailment associated with lovers.toothache.	I have the toothache.
Draw it.Pull it out.Draw it.	Draw it.
Hang it!An expression of impatience.Hang it!	Hang it!
You have to hang it first. Then you can drawClaudio plays on the fact that criminals were hanged and then drawn, or disemboweled.draw it.	You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.
Are you all good and honest men?	Are you good men and true?
Yes they are, otherwise it would be proper for them to suffer salvationBy salvation, he means damnation.salvation, body and soul.	Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation, body and soul.
If they had any allegianceBy allegiance, he means disloyalty.allegiance when they were chosen for the Princes watch, a punishment like that would be too good for them.	Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Princes watch.
Well, give them their assignment, Sir Dogberry.	Well, give them their charge, neighbor Dogberry.
First, which man do you think is most desertlessBy desertless (a made-up word), he means deserving.desertless to be leader of the watch?	First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?
Either Hugh Otecake, sir, or else George Seacole, because both of them can read and write.	Hugh Otecake, sir, or George Seacole, for they can write and read.
Come here, Sir Seacole. God has blessed you with a good name. To be good-looking is a matter of luck, but to read and write is a natural gift.	Come hither, neighbor Seacole. God hath blessed you with a good name. To be a well-favored man is the gift of fortune, but to write and read comes by nature.
Both of which, master constable	Both which, Master Constable
You have. I knew that would be your answer. Well, for your good looks, sir, thank God and dont boast about it. As for your reading and writing, use those skills when you cant use your looks. Youre thought to be the most senselessBy senseless, he means sensible.senseless and fit man here, so you will carry the lantern and be constable. This is your assignment:	You have. I knew it would be your answer. Well, for your favor, sir, why, give God thanks, and make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity. You are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch; therefore bear you the lantern. This is your charge:
Good Ursula, go wake my cousin and ask her to get up.	Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice and desire her to rise.
I will, lady.	I will, lady.
And request that she come here.	And bid her come hither.
Very well.	Well.
Really, I think your other ruff is better.	Troth, I think your other rebato were better.
No, please good Meg, Ill wear this one.	No, pray thee, good Meg, Ill wear this.
Honestly, its not as good as the other one, and Im sure your cousin will agree with me.	By my troth, s not so good, and I warrant your cousin will say so.
My cousins a fool, and you are too. Ill wear this one and none other.	My cousins a fool, and thou art another. Ill wear none but this.
I like your new wig and headdress, though Id like it more if the hair were a shade browner. And your gown is really stylish. You know, I saw the Duchess of Milans gown, the one that everyone praises so highly.	I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner; and your gowns a most rare fashion, i' faith. I saw the Duchess of Milans gown that they praise so.
Oh, they say that dress surpasses all others.	Oh, that exceeds, they say.
What do you want from me, my good man?	What would you with me, honest neighbor?
Please, sir, I would like to discuss some news that decernsDecerns is a mistake for concerns.decerns you greatly.	Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you that decerns you nearly.
Be brief, please, because, as you can see, this is a busy time for me.	Brief, I pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.
Indeed, sir, it is.	Marry, this it is, sir.
Yes, it truly is.	Yes, in truth it is, sir.
Whats the news, my good friends?	What is it, my good friends?
Sorry, sir, Goodman Verges tends to ramble. Hes an old man, sir, and his wits are not as bluntBlunt is a mistake for sharp.blunt as I wish they were. But truly, hes as honest as the skin between his brows.	Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter. An old man, sir, and his wits are not so blunt as, God help, I would desire they were, but, in faith, honest as the skin between his brows.
Yes, I thank God that I am as honest as all the other old men who are not honester than me.	Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living that is an old man and no honester than I.
Making comparisons is odorousOdorous is a mistake for odious (hateful).odorous, Verges. Get on with your story.	Comparisons are odorous. Palabras, neighbor Verges.
Friends, you are becoming tedious.	Neighbors, you are tedious.
Thank you for saying that, your Worship, but were just the poor dukes officers. But truly, if I were as tediousDogberry takes tedious to mean rich.tedious as a king, I would give everything to you, your Worship.	It pleases your Worship to say so, but we are the poor dukes officers. But truly, for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a king, I could find it in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.
All right, Friar Francis, lets keep this short. Do a simple ceremony, and list all the particular duties of marriage later.	Come, Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards.
(to CLAUDIO) Have you come here, my lord, to marry this lady?	(to CLAUDIO) You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?
No.	No.
No, he comes to be married to her. Friar, you are the one who has come to marry her.	To be married to her.Friar, you come to marry her.
Lady, do you come here to be married to this count?	Lady, you come hither to be married to this count?
I do.	I do.
If either of you knows any secret reason why you two should not be joined in marriage, I order you on your souls to say so.	If either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be conjoined, charge you on your souls to utter it.
Do you know any, Hero?	Know you any, Hero?
None, my lord.	None, my lord.
Do you know any, count?	Know you any, count?
Is our whole dissemblyDissembly is a mistake for assembly.dissembly here?	Is our whole dissembly appeared?
Oh, we need a stool and a cushion for the sexton.	Oh, a stool and a cushion for the Sexton.
Which ones are the malefactors?	Which be the malefactors?
Sir, that would be me and my partner.	Marry, that am I and my partner.
Yes, yes, weve been exhibitionedExhibitioned is a mistake for commissioned.exhibitioned to examine this case.	Nay, thats certain; we have the exhibition to examine.
No, youve misunderstood mewhere are the criminals whom Im supposed to examine? Have them come in front of the master constable.	But which are the offenders that are to be examined? Let them come before Master Constable.
Yes, indeed, bring them before me.	Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your name, friend?
	
Borachio.	Borachio.
Please, write down Borachio.And yours?	Pray, write down, Borachio.Yours, sirrah?
Im a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.	I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.
If you keep on the way youve been going, youll kill yourself. Theres no point in adding to your grief.	If you go on thus, you will kill yourself, And tis not wisdom thus to second grief Against yourself.
Stop advising me; your words pass through my ears like water through a sieve. Dont counsel me. Only someone whos been wronged as I have can comfort me. Find a father who loved his child as overwhelmingly as I loved Hero and askhim to be patient. Compare the length and width of that mans sadness against my own; match up all the complaints and strong emotions that run through our bodies. If a man who has suffered as I have gave me advice the way you dosmiling and stroking his beard, telling me to toss away my sorrow, giving speeches when he should be wailing with me, trying to heal my grief with little proverbs, spinning my head around with philosophythen I would take his advice and be patient. But that man doesnt exist. You can try to comfort a man who feels a pain that you have never felt, but once you feel it too, your sober advice will also turn into passion. You cant treat madness with rules or bind up insanity with little silken threads or cure heartache with hot air or lighten agony with pat phrases.	I pray thee, cease thy counsel, Which falls into mine ears as profitless As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel, Nor let no comforter delight mine ear But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine. Bring me a father that so loved his child, Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine, And bid him speak of patience. Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine, And let it answer every strain for strain, As thus for thus and such a grief for such, In every lineament, branch, shape, and form. If such a one will smile and stroke his beard, Bid sorrow wag, cry hem when he should groan, Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk With candle-wasters, bring him yet to me And I of him will gather patience. But there is no such man. For, brother, men Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief Which they themselves not feel, but, tasting it, Their counsel turns to passion which before Would give preceptial med'cine to rage, Fetter strong madness in a silken thread, Charm ache with air, and agony with words.
Please Margaret, help me write this poem for Beatrice.	Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.
Afterward, will you write a sonnet for me, praising my beauty?	Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
Ill write you such a glorious sonnet, Margaret, that no man will ever be able to come over it. You certainly deserve it.Benedick means that no man will ever improve on his sonnet;	In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come over it, for in most comely truth thou deservest it.
No man will come over meMargaret interprets come over in a sexual wayover me! What a life that would be!	To have no man come over me! Why, shall I always keep below stairs?
Your wit is as quick as a greyhounds jawsit catches whatever it goes after.	Thy wit is as quick as the greyhounds mouth; it catches.
And your wit is as blunt as a practice sword, with its dull tip; it hits people but doesnt hurt them.	And yours as blunt as the fencers foils, which hit but hurt not.
Its just that my wit is very gentlemanly, Margaret, and refuses to hurt a woman. Now please, tell Beatrice to come out. I admit defeat; I give you the bucklersA buckler is a shield with a spike in the middle of it.bucklers.	A most manly wit, Margaret, it will not hurt a woman. And so, I pray thee, call Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers.
No, you should give a woman your swordwe have our own bucklersMargaret interprets buckler as the vagina (and the sword as the penis).bucklers!	Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
Watch out, though, Margaretvirgins shouldnt be brandishing their bucklers around.	If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous weapons for maids.
Ill go get Beatrice for you, who can walk here by herselfshe has legs.	Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
Is this the family tomb of Leonato?	Is this the monument of Leonato?
It is, my lord.	It is, my lord.
(reading an epitaph) Here lies Hero, The heroic maiden killed by slanderous words. To repay her for her troubles, Death Gives her undying fame. So the life that died with shame Lives on with fame.	(reading an epitaph) Done to death by slanderous tongues Was the Hero that here lies. Death, in guerdon of her wrongs, Gives her fame which never dies. So the life that died with shame Lives in death with glorious fame.
Continuing to praise Hero after I die. Now start the music, and sing the solemn hymn. (singing) Please pardon, goddess of thenight, The men who killed your virgin knightDiana was the Roman goddess associated with the moon, and her knights were virgin women.virgin knight. These men now walk around hertomb, Singing songs of woe. Oh, midnight, join ourmoaning Help us with our sighs andgroaning Heavily, heavily. Graves, open up and releaseyour corpses Until Heros deathis fully mourned The meaning of this final line is unclear; it may also be interpreted as, until death itself is beaten, or until we have fully realized what his death means. Heavily,heavily.	Praising her when I am dumb. Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn. (Song) Pardon, goddess of thenight, Those that slew thy virginknight, For the which with songs ofwoe Round about her tomb theygo. Midnight, assist ourmoan. Help us to sigh andgroan Heavily, heavily. Graves, yawn and yield yourdead, Till death beutterd, Heavily,heavily.
Didnt I tell you she was innocent?	Did I not tell you she was innocent?
And the Prince and Claudio, who accused her, are innocent as well, because they were deceived by Don John. Margaret is partially guilty, although our investigation shows that she acted unintentionally.	So are the Prince and Claudio, who accused her Upon the error that you heard debated. But Margaret was in some fault for this, Although against her will, as it appears In the true course of all the question.
Well, Im glad that everything has been sorted out.	Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
Me toootherwise I would have had to duel with Claudio.	And so am I, being else by faith enforced To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Hero, you and the other women should all retreat to a room. When I send for you, come out wearing masks. The Prince and Claudio are supposed to be here by now.You know your job, brother. You have to pretend to be your nieces father, and give her away to Claudio.	Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all, Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves, And when I send for you, come hither masked. The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour To visit me.You know your office, brother. You must be father to your brothers daughter, And give her to young Claudio.
Ill do that, without giving away our secret.	Which I will do with confirmed countenance.
Friar, I think I need a favor from you.	Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
What do you need me to do? 	To do what, Signior? 
Come on, dont tell me that. I dont like itthat you knew about this, Iago. All this time Ivethought you were such a good friend that Ive let youspend my money as if it was yours.	Tush! Never tell me. I take it much unkindly That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
Damn it, youre not listening to me! I never dreamedthis was happeningif you find out I did, you can goahead and hate me.	'Sblood, but youll not hear me! If ever Idid dream of such a matter, abhor me.
You told me you hated him.	Thou toldst me Thou didst hold him in thy hate.
I do hate himThey\re talking about Othello, though they never mention his name.him, I swear. Three of Venices mostimportant noblemen took their hats off to him and asked him humblyto make me his lieutenant, the second in command. And I know my ownworth well enough to know I deserve that position. But he wants tohave things his own way, so he sidesteps the issue with a lot ofmilitary talk and refuses their request. Ivealready chosen my lieutenant, he says. And who does hechoose? A guy who knows more about numbers than fighting! This guyfrom Florence named Michael Cassio. He has a pretty wife but hecant even control her. And hes definitelynever commanded men in battle. Hes got no more hands-onknowledge of warfare than an old womanunless you countwhat hes read in books,	Despise me If I do not. Three great ones of the city (In personal suit to make me his lieutenant) Off-capped to him, and by the faith of man I know my price, I am worth no worse a place. But he (as loving his own pride and purposes) Evades them with a bombast circumstance Horribly stuffed with epithets of war, And in conclusion Nonsuits my mediators. For Certes, sayshe, I have already chose my officer. And what was he? Forsooth, a great arithmetician, One Michael Cassio, a Florentine (A fellow almost damned in a fair wife) That never set a squadron in the field, Nor the division of a battle knows More than a spinsterunless the bookish theoric,
	As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th' election And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds Christian and heathen, must be beleed and calmed By debitor and creditor. This counter-caster He (in good time) must his lieutenant be And I, bless the mark, his Moorships ancient.
By God, Id rather be his executioner.	By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
And theres nothing I can do about it.Thats the curse of military service. You get promotedwhen someone likes you, not because youre next in line.Now, you tell me: should I feel loyal to the Moor?	Why, theres no remedy. 'Tis the curse ofservice. Preferment goes by letter and affection, And not by old gradation, where each second Stood heir to th' first. Now sir, be judge yourself, Whether I in any just term am affined To love the Moor.
If you dont like him you should quit.	I would not follow him then.
No, calm down. Im serving under him to take advantageof him. We cant all be masters, and not all mastersshould be followed. Look at all the devoted servants who work fortheir masters their whole lives for nothing but their food, and thenwhen they get old theyre terminated. They ought to bewhipped for being so stupid. But then theres anotherkind of servant who looks dutiful and devoted, but whosreally looking out for himself. By pretending to serve their lords,these men get rich, and when theyve saved up enough theycan be their own masters. Guys like that have soul, andthats the kind of guy I am. Let me tell	O sir, content you. I follow him to serve my turn upon him. We cannot all be masters, nor all masters Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave That (doting on his own obsequious bondage) Wears out his time much like his masters ass For naught but provender, and when hes old, cashiered. Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty, Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves And, throwing but shows of service on their lords, Do well thrive by them. And when they have lined their coats, Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
	It is as sure as you are Roderigo, Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago. In following him, I follow but myself. Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty, But seeming so, for my peculiar end. For when my outward action doth demonstrate The native act and figure of my heart In compliment extern, tis not long after But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.
Thick-lipsThick-lips is a racial slur toward the Moor, Othello.Thick-lips sure is lucky if he can pull this off!	What a full fortune does the Thick-lips owe If he can carryt thus!
Lets shout up to Desdemonas father, wakehim, pester him, spoil his happiness, spread rumors about him in thestreets, enrage his relatives, and irritate him endlessly. Howeverreal his happiness is, it will vanish in light of this.	Call up herfather. Rouse him. Make after him, Poison his delight, Proclaim him in the streets. Incense her kinsmen, And, though he in a fertile climate dwell, Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy Yet throw such changes of vexation ont, As it may lose some color.
Heres her fathers house. Illcall out.	Here is her fathers house, Ill call aloud.
Do it, and shout like the citys on fire.	Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell As when, by night and negligence, the fire Is spied in populous cities.
Hey, Brabantio! Signor Brabantio, hey!	What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
Wake up, Brabantio! Wake up! Thieves! Thieves! Check on yourdaughter, your house, your money! Thieves! Thieves!	Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! Thieves! Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags! Thieves! thieves!
Whats the reason for this horrible shouting?Whats the matter?	What is the reason of this terrible summons? What is the matter there?
Sir, is everyone in your family at home?	Signior, is all your family within?
Are your doors locked?	Are your doors locked?
Why are you asking me that?	Why, wherefore askyou this?
For Gods sake, sir, youve been robbed. Getdressed. Your hearts going to break. Itslike half your souls been ripped out. At this veryminute an old black ram is having sex with your little white lamb.Wake up, wake up, ring a bell and wake up all the snoring citizens.If you wait too long youll have black grandchildren. Getup, I tell you!	Zounds, sir, youre robbed! For shame, put on yourgown. Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul. Even now, now, very now, an old black ram Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise, Awake the snorting citizens with the bell Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you. Arise, I say!
Are you crazy?	What, have youlost your wits?
Do you recognize my voice, noble lord?	Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
Not me. Who are you?	Not I. What are you?
My names Roderigo.	My name is Roderigo.
I told you not to hang around my house. Ive alreadytold you quite plainly that my daughter will never marry you. Nowyou come here drunk to make trouble and startle me out of a soundsleep?	The worser welcome. I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors. In honest plainness thou hast heard me say My daughter is not for thee. And now in madness, Being full of supper and distempering drafts, Upon malicious knavery dost thou come To start my quiet?
Sir, sir, sir	Sir, sir, sir
You know Im powerful enough to make you pay for this.	But thou must needs be sure My spirits and my place have in their power To make this bitter to thee.
Please wait, sir.	Patience, goodsir.
Why are you talking about robbery? This is Venice. My houseisnt in some remote countryside.	What tellst thou me of robbing? This is Venice, My house is not a grange.
Brabantio, with all due respect, Im here out ofcourtesy and good will. Ive come to tell you	Most graveBrabantio, In simple and pure soul I come to you
My God, sir, youre stubborn and suspicious. We comehere to help you and you treat us like thugs, but you let an Africanhorse climb all over your daughter. Your grandsons will neigh to youlike horses. Your whole family will be ruined.	Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if thedevil bid you. Because we come to do you service and you think weare ruffians, youll have your daughter covered with aBarbary horse. Youll have your nephews neigh to you.Youll have coursers for cousins and gennets for germans.
What kind of crude jerk are you?	What profane wretch art thou?
The kind that tells you that the Moor is having sex with yourdaughter right now.	I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
Youre a villain!	Thou art a villain!
Youre a senator!	You are a senator!
Youre going to pay for this, Roderigo. I know who youare.	This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.
Ill answer for everything. I dont know ifyou know or approve of this, but in the wee hours of the morningyour daughter left your house, with no better escort than a hiredgondolier, to go into the rough embrace of a lustful Moor. If all ofthis happened with your	Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you, Ift be your pleasure and most wise consent (As partly I find it is) that your fair daughter At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night
	But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier, To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor, If this be known to you and your allowance, We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs. But if you know not this my manners tell me We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe That, from the sense of all civility, I thus would play and trifle with your reverence. Your daughter (if you have not given her leave) I say again, hath made a gross revolt, Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes In an extravagant and wheeling stranger Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself. If she be in her chamber or your house, Let loose on me the justice of the state For thus deluding you.
Light the candles! Wake up my whole household! I dreamt aboutthis. Im starting to worry its true. Give mesome light!	Strike on thetinder, ho! Give me a taper, call up all my people! This accident is not unlike my dream, Belief of it oppresses me already. Light, I say, light!
(to RODERIGO) Its time for me to say goodbye to you. It would beinappropriatedangerous, evenfor me to beseen working against the Moor, as I would if I stayed. The Venetiangovernment might reprimand him for this, but it cantsafely get rid of him, since it needs him urgently for the imminentCyprus wars. They couldnt find another man with hisabilities to lead their armed forcesnot if their soulsdepended on it. I hate him, but Ive got to show himsigns of loyalty	(to RODERIGO) Farewell, for Imust leave you. It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place, To be producted (as, if I stay, I shall) Against the Moor. For I do know the state (However this may gall him with some check) Cannot with safety cast him, for hes embarked With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars (Which even now stand in act) that, for their souls, Another of his fathom they have none To lead their business. In which regard,
	Yet for necessity of present life I must show out a flag and sign of love, (Which is indeed but sign). That you shall surely find him, Lead to the Sagittary the raisd search, And there will I be with him. So farewell.
Its true. Shes gone. The rest of my lifewill be nothing but bitterness. Now, Roderigo, where did you seeher?Oh, that miserable wretch!You say yousaw her with the Moor?Oh, who would want to be afather?How did you know it was her?To thinkshe tricked me so easily!What did she say toyou?Get me more candles, and wake up all my relatives.Do you think theyre married?	It is too true an evil. Gone she is. And whats to come of my despisd time Is naught but bitterness. Now, Roderigo, Where didst thou see her?Oh, unhappy girl! With the Moor, sayst thou?Who would be afather? How didst thou know twas she?Oh, shedeceives me Past thought!What said she to you?Get moretapers, Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?
Yes, I really think so.	Truly, I think they are.
Oh, heaven, how did she get out? My own flesh and blood rebelsagainst me! Fathers, never trust your daughters just because theyact obedient and innocent. Are there magic spells that can leadyoung virgins astray? Have you ever heard of anything like that,Roderigo?	Oh, heaven, how got she out? Oh, treason of the blood! Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds By what you see them act. Is there not charms By which the property of youth and maidhood May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo, Of some such thing?
Yes, sir, I have.	Yes, sir, I haveindeed.
Call my brother.Now I wish youd marriedher!Some of you go one way, some the otherway.Do you know where we can find her and the Moor?	Call up my brotherOh, would you had had her! Some one way, some another. Do you know Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
I think I can find him. Get together a group of armed men andfollow me.	I think I can discover him, if you please To get good guard and go along with me.
Lead the way. Ill stop at every house. Imrespected enough that most of them will do what Isay.Get your weapons! And get the officers who guard thecity at night.Lets go, Roderigo.Ill reward you for your troubles.	Pray you lead on. At every house Ill call. I may command at most.Get weapons, ho! And raise some special officers of might. On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.
Ive killed many men in battle, but I still believeits deeply wrong to murder someone. Sometimes I worryIm not cruel enough for this job. Nine or ten times Iwanted to stab him under the ribs.	Though in the trade of war I have slain men, Yet do I hold it very stuff o' th'conscience To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity Sometimes to do me service. Nine or ten times I had thought t' have yerked him here under the ribs.
Its better that you didnt kill him.	'Tis better as it is.
But he kept chattering so foolishly, talking about you in suchinsulting and despicable terms, that it was hard for me to restrainmyself. But please tell me, sir, is your marriage secureIago may be asking whether Othello has consummated his marriage by sleeping with Desdemona yet. A marriage could be annulled if it had never been consummated.secure? Brabantiois an important man in this city, almost as powerful as the dukehimself. Hell try to annul your marriage, or elseinflict whatever punishment the law and his power will allow him to.	Nay, but he prated And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms Against your honor That, with the little godliness I have, I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir, Are you fast married? Be assured of this: That the Magnifico is much beloved And hath in his effect a voice potential As double as the Dukes. He will divorce you, Or put upon you what restraint and grievance The law (with all his might to enforce it on) Will give him cable.
Let him do his worst. The services I have done for the Venetiangovernment will count for more than his complaints will. No oneknows this yetand I dont like to brag, but Icome from a royal family, and Im as noble as the womanIve married. And let me tell you, Iago, if Ididnt love Desdemona as much as I do, Idnever agree to get married and lose my freedom at all. But look atthose lights. Whos coming?	Let him do hisspite. My services which I have done the signiory Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet toknow Which, when I know that boasting is an honor, I shall promulgate. I fetch my life and being From men of royal siege, and my demerits May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune As this that I have reached. For know, Iago, But that I love the gentle Desdemona, I would not my unhousd free condition Put into circumscription and confine For the seas worth. But look, what lights come yond?
These reports are inconsistent. You cant trust them.	Theres no composition in this news That gives them credit.
Its true, theyre inconsistent. My letterssay there are a hundred and seven ships.	Indeed, they are disproportioned. My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
And mine say a hundred and forty.	And mine a hundred and forty.
And mine say two hundred. But often in these cases, reports arejust estimates. The important thing is that they all say a Turkishfleet is approaching Cyprus.	And mine, twohundred. But though they jump not on a just account As in these cases, where the aim reports 'Tis oft with differenceyet do they allconfirm A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
Yes, we get the idea. The inconsistency doesnt make methink that the reports are all wrong. I have no doubt about whattheyre basically saying, and itsfrightening.	Nay, it is possible enough to judgment. I do not so secure me in the error, But the main article I do approve In fearful sense.
(offstage) Hello! Hey, hello!	(within) What, ho, what,ho, what, ho!
Its a messenger from the warships.	A messenger from the galleys.
Why are you here?	Now, whats the business?
Signor Angelo told me to come here and tell you that the Turkishfleet is heading for Rhodes, not Cyprus.	The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes, So was I bid report here to the state By Signior Angelo.
What can you see out on the ocean?	What from the cape can you discern at sea?
Nothing. The waters so rough that I cantsee any sails, either in the bay or on the ocean.	Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood. I cannot twixt the heaven and the main Descry a sail.
It was windy on shore too. A big blast of wind shook ourfortifications. How could a ship made out of wood hold together inthose mountainous waves? What do you think will be the result ofthis storm?	Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land, A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements. If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them, Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
The Turkish navy will be broken up. The winds whippingup the waves so high you expect them to reach the clouds and splashagainst the stars in the sky. Ive never seen the watersso disturbed.	A segregation of the Turkish fleet. For do but stand upon the foaming shore, The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds, The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane, Seems to cast water on the burning bear, And quench the guards of th' ever-fixdpole. I never did like molestation view On the enchafd flood.
If the Turkish fleet isnt protected in some harbor,their men must all be drowned. No ship could survive this storm.	If that the Turkish fleet Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned. It is impossible they bear it out.
Our noble and courageous general Othello having been informed thatthe Turkish fleet has been completely destroyed, invites every manto celebrate our victory. Some of you dance, some of you makebonfires, and every man celebrate in whatever way he likes to. Forbesides the good news, we are also celebrating his marriage.Thats the end of the announcement. There will be a feastfrom five o'clock until eleven. God bless the island ofCyprus and our noble general Othello!	It is Othellos pleasure, our noble and valiantgeneral, that, upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mereperdition of the Turkish fleet, every man put himself into triumph:some to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what sport andrevels his addiction leads him. For besides these beneficial news,it is the celebration of his nuptial. So much was his pleasureshould be proclaimed. All offices are open, and there is fullliberty of feasting from this present hour of five till the bellhave told eleven. Bless the isle of Cyprus and our noble generalOthello!
Good Michael, keep a careful eye on the guards tonight.Lets exercise restraint and not let the party get toowild.	Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight. Lets teach ourselves that honorable stop Not to outsport discretion.
Iago has orders what to do. But Ill see to itpersonally anyway.	Iago hath direction what to do, But notwithstanding with my personal eye Will I look to t.
Iagos a good man. Goodnight, Michael. Come talk to metomorrow as early as you can.Come with me, my dear love.Now that the weddings over, we can have the pleasure ofconsummating our marriage. Good night, everyone.	Iago is mosthonest. Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest Let me have speech with you. Come, my dear love, The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue: That profits yet to come tween me and you. Good night.
Hello, Iago. Its time for us to stand guard.	Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.
Not yet, lieutenant. Its not even teno'clock. The general got rid of us early tonight so hecould be with Desdemona.I cant blame him. Hehasnt spent the night with her yet, and shesbeautiful enough to be JovesJove is the head of the gods in Roman mythology.Joves lover.	Not this hour, lieutenant, tis not yet teno' the clock. Our general cast us thus early for the loveof his Desdemonawho let us not therefore blame. He hathnot yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sport for Jove.
Shes an exquisitely beautiful lady.	Shes a most exquisite lady.
And I bet shes good in bed too.	And, Ill warrant her, full of game.
Musicians, start playing here. Ill pay you for yourtrouble. Play something short that will put the general in a goodmood.	Masters, play here, I will content your pains. Something thats brief, and bid Goodmorrow, general.
Your instruments all have a nasal twang. Have they been to NaplesNaples was considered a likely place to contract syphilis, which eats away at the bridge of the nose.Naples?	Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that they speaki' th' nose thus?
Excuse me?	How, sir? How?
Are these wind instruments?	Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
Yes, they are.	Ay, marry, are they, sir.
Oh, theres the problem.	Oh, thereby hangs a tail.
Whats the problem?	Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
Anyone full of hot air is a problem. But heres somemoney. The general likes your music a lot, but he asks you to stopplaying now.	Marry sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But, masters,heres money for you, and the general so likes your musicthat he desires you, for loves sake, to make no morenoise with it.
Well, well stop, then.	Well, sir, we will not.
Iago, give these letters to the ships captain who brought me here, and ask him to pay my respects to the Senate of Venice. Now thats done, Im going to walk on the fortification walls. Look for me there when you come back.	These letters give, Iago, to the pilot, And by him do my duties to the senate. That done, I will be walking on the works, Repair there to me.
I will, my lord.	Well, my good lord, Ill do t.
Shall we go see this fortification, men?	This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see t?
Were at your service, my lord.	Well wait upon your lordship.
Ill do everything I can for you, Cassio.	Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do All my abilities in thy behalf.
Please do, madam. My husbands so upset about Cassios problem youd think it was his own.	Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband As if the cause were his.
Your husbands such a good man. Dont worry, Cassio. Im sure you and my husband will be as friendly as you were before.	Oh, thats an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio, But I will have my lord and you again As friendly as you were.
My dear beautiful lady, whatever happens to Michael Cassio, hell always be your humble servant.	Bounteous madam, Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio, Hes never anything but your true servant.
I know that. Thank you. Youre my husbands friend and youve known him a long time. I assure you the only reason hes keeping away from you now is political.	I know t, I thank you. You do love my lord. You have known him long, and be you well assured He shall in strangeness stand no farther off Than in a polite distance.
Yes, my lady. But those political considerations might last such a long time that the general will forget my love and service, especially if Im gone and someone else has my job.	Ay, but, lady, That policy may either last so long, Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet, Or breed itself so out of circumstances, That, I being absent and my place supplied, My general will forget my love and service.
Thatll never happen. Emilia here will be my witness: I promise you that youll get your position back again. And if I promise to help someone, I do everything I can. My husband will never get a moments rest, Ill keep him up at night talking about you until he runs out	Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee, If I do vow a friendship, Ill perform it To the last article. My lord shall never rest, Ill watch him tame and talk him out of patience.
Excuse me, do you know which room Lieutenant Cassio lies inlies in = sleeps inlies in?	Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
I wouldnt dare say he lies anywhere.	I dare not say he lies anywhere.
Why do you say that?	Why, man?
Hes a soldier. If I accused a soldier of lying, hed stab me.	Hes a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, tis stabbing.
Oh, come on. Where does he sleep?	Go to. Where lodges he?
Telling you where hes sleeping is like telling you where Im lying.	To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.
What on earth does that mean?	Can anything be made of this?
I dont know where hes staying, so if I told you hes sleeping here or there, Id be lying.	I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.
Can you ask around and find out?	Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?
Ill go ask questions everywhere.	I will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.
Find him and tell him to come here. Tell him Ive spoken to my husband on his behalf, and I think everything will be all right.	Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
I think I can do that. Its not too much to ask.	To do this is within the compass of mans wit, and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
Do you really think so?	Will you think so?
What do you mean, do I think so?	Think so, Iago?
What, just because they kissed in private?	What, To kiss in private?
An illicit kiss!	An unauthorized kiss!
Maybe she was just naked in bed with him for an hour or so, but they didnt do anything.	Or to be naked with her friend in bed An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
Naked in bed together, but without doing anything? Come on, Iago. That would be like playing a trick on the devil: theyd make him think theyre going to commit adultery, but then back off. Anyone who acted like that would be letting the devil tempt them, and tempting God to condemn them.	Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm! It is hypocrisy against the devil. They that mean virtuously, and yet do so, The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
As long as they didnt do anything, it would only be a minor sin. But if I gave my wife a handkerchief	So they do nothing, tis a venial slip. But if I give my wife a handkerchief
Then what?	What then?
Then its hers. And if its hers, I guess she can give it to any man she wants.	Why then tis hers, my lord, and, being hers, She may, I think, bestow t on any man.
Her reputation is also her own. Can she give that away too?	She is protectress of her honor too. May she give that?
You havent seen anything, then?	You have seen nothing then?
No, and I didnt hear anything either, or suspect anything at all.	Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
But youve seen her and Cassio together.	Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
Yes, but I didnt see anything wrong, and I heard every syllable they said.	But then I saw no harm, and then I heard Each syllable that breath made up between them.
Didnt they ever whisper?	What, did they never whisper?
Never, my lord.	Never, my lord.
Or ask you to leave the room?	Nor send you out o' th' way?
Never.	Never.
Not even to get her fan, or her gloves, or her mask, or anything?	To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
No, my lord.	Never, my lord.
Thats strange.	Thats strange.
Id swear to you on my soul that shes a good, honest person, sir. If you suspect otherwise, stop thinking that right now because youre wrong. If any jerk has tried to convince you shes bad, I hope God curses him. If shes not honest, faithful, and true, then theres no such thing as a faithful wife or a happy husband.	I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom. If any wretch have put this in your head Let heaven requite it with the serpents curse For if she be not honest, chaste, and true Theres no man happy. The purest of their wives Is foul as slander.
Please, sir, dont trouble yourself.	I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
I beg your pardon; walking will make me feel better.	Oh, pardon me, twill do me good to walk.
Good night, madam. Thank you.	Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.
Youre most welcome.	Your honor is most welcome.
Would you walk out with me, sir?Oh, Desdemona	Will you walk, sir?O Desdemona
Yes, my lord?	My lord?
Go to bed right this minute. Ill be there shortly. Send your maid Emilia away. Make sure you do what I say.	Get you to bed on th' instant, I will be returned Forthwith. Dismiss your attendant there, look t be done.
I will, my lord.	I will, my lord.
How are things now? He looks calmer than he did before.	How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
He says hell come back right away. He asked me to go to bed and to send you away.	He says he will return incontinent, And hath commanded me to go to bed And bid me to dismiss you.
Send me away?	Dismiss me?
Thats what he said. So give me my nightgown, Emilia, and Ill say goodnight. We shouldnt displease him.	It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia, Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu. We must not now displease him.
Here, stand behind this wall; hell come right away. Keep your sword out, and then stick it in as far as itll go. Quick, quick. Dont be afraid. Ill be right next to you. This will either make us or break us. Keep that in mind, and be steady.	Here, stand behind this bulk, straight will he come. Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. Quick, quick! Fear nothing. Ill be at thy elbow. It makes us, or it mars us. Think on that, And fix most firm thy resolution.
Stay right near me. I may mess it up.	Be near at hand, I may miscarry in t.
Im right behind you. Be bold, and get ready.	Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand.
I dont really want to do this, but hes given me good reasons. I guess its only one manno big deal. My sword comes out, and he dies.	I have no great devotion to the deed And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons. 'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword: he dies.
(to himself) Ive rubbed this young pimple until hes ready to pop, and now hes angry. Whether he kills Cassio, or Cassio kills him, or they kill each other, it all works in my favor. If Roderigo survives, though, hell ask me for all the gold and jewelry that I stole from him and said I gave to Desdemona. I cant let that happen. If Cassio survives,hes so handsome and well-spoken that he makes me look ugly. And besides, the Moor might tell him about my lies about him.That would be very dangerous for me. No, hes got to die. Let it be so. I hear him coming.	(aside) I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense, And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other, Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo, He calls me to a restitution large Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him As gifts to Desdemona. It must not be. If Cassio do remain He hath a daily beauty in his life That makes me ugly. And besides, the Moor May unfold me to himthere stand I in much peril. No, he must die. But so, I hear him coming.
I have to do it, I have to do it. I have to keep my reason in mind. I wont say out loud what my reason is, but I have to do it. But I wont shed any of her blood or scar that beautiful skin, whiter than snow and smooth as the finest marble. But shes got to die, or shell cheat on other men. Put out the light of the candle, and then put out the light of her heart. If I extinguish the candle, I can light it again if I regret it. But once I kill you, you beautiful, fake woman, I do not know the magic that could bring you back. When Ive plucked this rose, I cant make it grow again; it will have no choice but to wither and die. Let me smell you while youre still on the tree. (he kisses her) Oh, that sweet breath almost convinces me not to kill you and carry out justice. One more, one more kiss. If youre this beautiful when youre dead, Ill kill you and then love you afterward. (kissing her) One more, and this is the last. Such a sweet kiss was never so deadly. I have to cry, but I have to be cruel too. Im acting like God in the Old TestamentI have to punish the one I love. Shes waking up.	It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul. Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars, It is the cause. Yet Ill not shed her blood, Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow And smooth as monumental alabaster. Yet she must die, else shell betray more men. Put out the light, and then put out the light. If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, I can again thy former light restore Should I repent me. But once put out thy light, Thou cunningst pattern of excelling nature, I know not where is that Promethean heat That can thy light relume. When I have plucked thy rose I cannot give it vital growth again, It must needs wither. Ill smell thee on the tree. Oh, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade Justice to break her sword! One more, one more. Be thus when thou art dead and I will kill thee And love thee after. (kissing her) One more, and thats the last. So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep, But they are cruel tears. This sorrows heavenly, It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
Whos there? Othello?	Whos there? Othello?
Yes, Desdemona. 	Ay, Desdemona. 
Now all of my familys troubles have come to a glorious end, thanks to my brother, King Edward IV. All the clouds that threatened the York family have vanished and turned to sunshine. Now we wear the wreaths of victory on our heads. Weve taken off our armor and weapons and hung them up as decorations. Instead of hearing trumpets call us to battle, we dance at parties. We get to wear easy smiles on our faces rather than the grim expressions of war. Instead of charging toward our enemies on armored horses, we dance for our ladies in their chambers, accompanied by sexy songs on the lute. But Im not made to be a seducer, or to make faces at myself in the mirror. I was badly made and dont have the looks to strut my stuff in front of pretty sluts. Ive been cheated of a nice body and face, or even normal proportions. I am deformed, spit out from my mothers womb prematurely and so badly formed that dogs bark at me as I limp by them. Im left with nothing to do in this weak, idle peacetime, unless I want to look at my lumpy shadow in the sun and sing about that.	Now is the winter of our discontent Made glorious summer by this son of York, And all the clouds that loured upon our house In the deep bosom of the ocean buried. Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths, Our bruisd arms hung up for monuments, Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, Our dreadful marches to delightful measures. Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front; And now, instead of mounting barbd steeds To fright the souls of fearful adversaries, He capers nimbly in a ladys chamber To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, Nor made to court an amorous looking glass; I, that am rudely stamped and want loves majesty To strut before a wanton ambling nymph; I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion, Cheated of feature by dissembling nature, Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time Into this breathing world, scarce half made up, And that so lamely and unfashionable That dogs bark at me as I halt by them Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace, Have no delight to pass away the time, Unless to see my shadow in the sun And descant on mine own deformity.
	To entertain these fair well-spoken days, I am determind to prove a villain And hate the idle pleasures of these days. Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous, By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, To set my brother Clarence and the king In deadly hate, the one against the other; And if King Edward be as true and just As I am subtle, false, and treacherous, This day should Clarence closely be mewed up About a prophecy which says that G Of Edwards heirs the murderer shall be. Dive, thoughts, down to my soul. Here Clarence comes.
	That waits upon your Grace?
His majesty is so concerned about my personal safety that he has ordered them to conduct me to the TowerThe Tower of London, where political prisoners were kept.Tower.	His majesty, Tend'ring my persons safety, hath appointed This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
Youre being arrested? Why?	Upon what cause?
Because my name is George.	Because my name is George.
Thats not your fault! He should imprison the person who named you, instead. Maybe the king is sending you to the Tower to have you renamed. But, really, whats going on, Clarence? Can you tell me?	Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours. He should, for that, commit your godfathers. O, belike his majesty hath some intent That you shall be new christened in the Tower. But whats the matter, Clarence? May I know?
Ill tell you as soon as I know, Richard, because at this point I have no idea. All Ive been able to find out is that our brother the king has been listening to prophecies and dreams. He picked out the letter G from the alphabet and said a wizard told him that G will take the throne away from his children. He thinks G is me. Ive learned that this, along with other frivolous reasons like it, is what prompted the king to send me to prison.	Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest As yet I do not. But, as I can learn, He hearkens after prophecies and dreams, And from the crossrow plucks the letter G, And says a wizard told him that by G His issue disinherited should be. And for my name of George begins with G, It follows in his thought that I am he. These, as I learn, and such like toys as these Have moved his Highness to commit me now.
Well, this is what happens when men let themselves be ruled by women. The king isnt the one sending you to the Tower, Clarence. Its his wife, Lady Grey, who got him to do this. Remember how she and her brother, Anthony Woodeville, made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower? Hastings was just released. Were not safe, Clarence, were not safe.	Why, this it is when men are ruled by women. 'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower. My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, tis she That tempers him to this extremity. Was it not she and that good man of worship, Anthony Woodeville, her brother there, That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower, From whence this present day he is delivered? We are not safe, Clarence. We are not safe.
By God, I think the only people who are safe are the queens own relatives and the late-night messengers the king uses to fetch his mistress, Mistress Shore. Did you hear how Lord Hastings had to beg the queen to be freed?	By heaven, I think there is no man is secure But the queens kindred and night-walking heralds That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore. Heard ye not what an humble suppliant Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?
Hastings got his freedom by bowing down to that goddess. And Ill tell you what. If we want to stay in the kings good graces, were going have to act like the mistresssRichard implies that Mistress Shore and the queen did not belong to the rank of gentry.mistresss servants, too. Ever since our brother made them gentlewomen, Mistress Shore and the queen have become mighty busybodies in our kingdom.	Humbly complaining to her deity Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty. Ill tell you what: I think it is our way, If we will keep in favor with the king, To be her men and wear her livery. The jealous o'erworn widow and herself, Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen, Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.
I beg your pardon, my lords, but the king gave me orders that no one, however high in rank, should speak privately to Clarence.	I beseech your Graces both to pardon me. His majesty hath straitly given in charge That no man shall have private conference, Of what degree soever, with his brother.
All right. If you like, Brakenbury, you can listen to anything we say. Were not saying anything treasonous, man. We say the king is wise and good, and his noble queen is getting old, pretty, and not jealous. And that Mr. Shores wife has nice feet, cherry lips, pretty eyes, and a very pleasant way of expressing herself. And, finally, that the queens relatives have all been elevated in rank. What do you think? Is there anything inaccurate in that?	Even so. An please your Worship, Brakenbury, You may partake of anything we say. We speak no treason, man. We say the king Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous. We say that Shores wife hath a pretty foot, A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue, And that the queens kindred are made gentlefolks. How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
I have nothing to do with what youre talking about, my lord.	With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
Nothing to do with Mrs. Shore! I tell you, mister, theres only one man who gets to do nothing,To do nothing, or naught, meant to have sex. Richard is playing off Brakenburys innocent, frightened remark.nothing, with her and not be punished for it. Everyone else had better keep their nothings to themselves.	Naught to do with Mistress Shore? I tell thee, fellow, He that doth naught with her, excepting one, Were best he do it secretly, alone.
Who is that, my lord?	What one, my lord?
Her husband, you rascal. Are you going to get me in trouble?	Her husband, knave. Wouldst thou betray me?
I beg your GraceGrace is a title of address for nobility and royalty and might apply to a king, queen, duke, duchess, or archbishop.Grace to pardon me, and now please stop talking to Clarence.	I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke.
We know you have a job to do, Brakenbury, and well do what you say.	We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
We are required to serve the queen, and we must obey her. Farewell, brother. I will go to the king and do whatever you want me to, even if its to call my brothers wife sister, in order to set you free. But just so you know, I am very angry about how our own brother has treated you, angrier than you can imagine.	We are the queens abjects and must obey. Brother, farewell. I will unto the king, And whatsoe'er you will employ me in, Were it to call King Edwards widow sister, I will perform it to enfranchise you. Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
It doesnt make either of us happy, I know.	I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
Well, your imprisonment wont last long. I will either get you out, lying if I have to, or stay in prison in your place. In the meantime, be patient.	Well, your imprisonment shall not be long. I will deliver you or else lie for you. Meantime, have patience.
I have no choice. Goodbye.	I must perforce. Farewell.
Go walk the path that you will never return from. Dumb, honest Clarence. I love you so much that Ill send your soul to heaven very soonif heaven will accept anything from me, that is. But whos coming? The newly released Hastings?	Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven, If heaven will take the present at our hands. But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?
Good afternoon, my dear lord!	Good time of day unto my gracious lord.
The same to you, my lord! Welcome to the open air again. How did you tolerate prison?	As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain. Well are you welcome to the open air. How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. But I will live to thank those who sent me there.	With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks That were the cause of my imprisonment.
No doubt, no doubt. And so will Clarence, for your enemies are his enemies, and they have gotten the upper hand of him as well as of you.	No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too, For they that were your enemies are his And have prevailed as much on him as you.
Its a shame that we eagles are caged up while the vultures are free to do whatever they please.	More pity that the eagle should be mewed While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
Whats the news abroad?	What news abroad?
No news as bad as the news at home: The king is sickly, weak, and depressed, and his doctors are very afraid hes going to die	No news so bad abroad as this at home: The king is sickly, weak and melancholy, And his physicians fear him mightily.
Now, by George, that really is terrible news. Oh, the king has abused his body with bad habits for a long time, and its finally taking its toll on him. Very sad. Where is he, in his bed?	Now, by Saint Paul, that news is bad indeed. O, he hath kept an evil diet long, And overmuch consumed his royal person. 'Tis very grievous to be thought upon. Where is he, in his bed?
He is.	He is.
You go ahead, and I will follow you.	Go you before, and I will follow you.
	Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven. Ill in to urge his hatred more to Clarence With lies well steeled with weighty arguments, And, if I fail not in my deep intent, Clarence hath not another day to live; Which done, God take King Edward to His mercy, And leave the world for me to bustle in. For then Ill marry Warwicks youngest daughter. What though I killed her husband and her father? The readiest way to make the wench amends Is to become her husband and her father; The which will I, not all so much for love As for another secret close intent By marrying her which I must reach unto. But yet I run before my horse to market. Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns. When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
Set down your honorable load, men, if there is ever any honor in being dead. I want to mourn the cruel death of this good man. Look at the noble kings poor cold bodythe measly remains of the Lancaster family.	Set down, set down your honorable load, If honor may be shrouded in a hearse, Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament Th' untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
	Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster, Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood, Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost To hear the lamentations of poor Anne, Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son, Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds. Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. O, cursd be the hand that made these holes; Cursd the heart that had the heart to do it; Cursd the blood that let this blood from hence. More direful hap betide that hated wretch That makes us wretched by the death of thee Than I can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads, Or any creeping venomed thing that lives. If ever he have child, abortive be it, Prodigious, and untimely brought to light, Whose ugly and unnatural aspect May fright the hopeful mother at the view, And that be heir to his unhappiness.
Be patient, madam. Im sure his majesty will recover his health soon.	Have patience, madam. Theres no doubt his majesty Will soon recover his accustomed health.
Youll only make him worse with all your worry. For Gods sake, let people comfort you. Then youll be able to cheer him up.	In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse. Therefore, for Gods sake, entertain good comfort And cheer his grace with quick and merry eyes.
If he were dead, what would happen to me?	If he were dead, what would betide on me?
Nothing more than that youd lose your husband.	No other harm but loss of such a lord.
Losing this husband will cause me all sorts of harm.	The loss of such a lord includes all harms.
You have been blessed with an excellent son, who will comfort you when the king is dead.	The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son To be your comforter when he is gone.
But hes young, and as long as hes too young to become king, Richard, the duke of Gloucester, has power over him. Richard loves neither me nor any of you.	Ah, he is young, and his minority Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester, A man that loves not me nor none of you.
Has it been decided that Richard will be ProtectorA Protector acted for a king until he was old enough to rule on his own.Protector?	Is it concluded that he shall be Protector?
Its been decided, though not yet officially announced. But thats what will happen if the king dies.	It is determined, not concluded yet; But so it must be if the king miscarry.
Why do you look so depressed today, your Grace?	Why looks your grace so heavily today?
Oh, I had a miserable night. I had such dark and terrifying dreams that I swear I wouldnt spend another night like that if it guaranteed me a whole lifetime of happy days.	O, I have passed a miserable night, So full of ugly dreams, of ugly sights, That, as I am a Christian faithful man, I would not spend another such a night Though twere to buy a world of happy days, So full of dismal terror was the time.
What was your dream? Tell me.	What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.
I thought I had escaped from the Tower and was on a ship to France with my brother Richard, who persuaded me to leave my cabin and walk on deck with him. Looking toward England, we reminisced about the countless frightening experiences wed had in the wars between the Yorks and the Lancasters. As we were pacing the deck, which was tipping heavily, Richard seemed to stumble, and as I tried to grab hold of him and keep him from falling, he knocked me overboard into the crashing waves. Lord, how painful it was to drown. The sound of the rushing water was terrible, and so were the sights. I saw a thousand shipwrecks, a thousand men whom fish had gnawed to the bone, huge anchors, chunks of gold, heaps of pearls, and precious jewelsall scattered on the bottom of the sea.	Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower And was embarked to cross to Burgundy, And in my company my brother Gloucester, Who from my cabin tempted me to walk Upon the hatches. Thence we looked toward England And cited up a thousand fearful times, During the wars of York and Lancaster That had befall'n us. As we paced along Upon the giddy footing of the hatches, Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard Into the tumbling billows of the main. O Lord, methought what pain it was to drown, What dreadful noise of waters in my ears, What sights of ugly death within my eyes. Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks, A thousand men that fishes gnawed upon, Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, All scattered in the bottom of the sea.
Well. Now Ive done a good days work. You must all keep up this united front. Every day I expect a message from God to bring me away from here. Now my soul can depart for heaven peacefully, since my friends have made peace here on earth. Rivers and Hastings, take each others hand. Dont simply hide your hatred. Swear your love for each other.	Why, so. Now have I done a good days work. You peers, continue this united league. I every day expect an embassage From my Redeemer to redeem me hence, And more in peace my soul shall part to heaven Since I have made my friends at peace on earth Rivers and Hastings, take each others hand. Dissemble not your hatred. Swear your love.
(taking HASTINGSs hand) I swear I have cleansed my heart of all hate. With this handshake, I guarantee my love.	(taking HASTINGSs hand) By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate, And with my hand I seal my true hearts love.
On my honor, I feel the same.	So thrive I as I truly swear the like.
Make sure you mean what you say. Otherwise God, the ultimate King, will uncover your lies and cause you to be the death of each other.	Take heed you dally not before your king, Lest He that is the supreme King of kings Confound your hidden falsehood, and award Either of you to be the others end.
On my honor, I swear I love Rivers with all my heart.	So prosper I as I swear perfect love.
And I love Hastings with all my heart.	And I as I love Hastings with my heart.
Tell me, good grandmother, is our father dead?	Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
No, boy.	No, boy.
Then why do you weep so often, and beat your breast, and cry, Oh Clarence, my unlucky son?	Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast, And cry, O Clarence, my unhappy son?
Why do you look at us and shake your head, and call us orphans, wretches, castaways, if our noble father is still alive?	Why do you look on us and shake your head, And call us orphans, wretches, castaways, If that our noble father were alive?
My pretty children, both of you misunderstand me. Im lamenting the sickness of the king, because Id hate to lose himIm not mourning your fathers death. What would be the point of crying over someone who was already dead?	My pretty cousins, you mistake me both. I do lament the sickness of the king, As loath to lose him, not your fathers death. It were lost sorrow to wail one thats lost.
So youre admitting Clarence, my father, is dead. My uncle the king is to blame for this. God will take revenge. I will pray every day that he does.	Then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead. The king mine uncle is to blame for it. God will revenge it, whom I will importune With earnest prayers, all to that effect.
And so will I.	And so will I.
Quiet, children, quiet. The king loves you very much. Innocent sweethearts, you have no idea whos responsible for your fathers death.	Peace, children, peace. The king doth love you well. Incapable and shallow innocents, You cannot guess who caused your fathers death.
Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?	Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?
Im telling you, I hardly know myself. Did you hear the news thats going around?	I promise you I scarcely know myself. Hear you the news abroad?
Yes, that the king is dead.	Yes, that the king is dead.
Bad news, by God. The news is always bad. But this news is bound to make the world go mad.	Ill news, by 'r Lady. Seldom comes the better. I fear, I fear, twill prove a giddy world.
Neighbors, hello.	Neighbors, God speed.
Good day to you, sir.	Give you good morrow, sir.
Is it true that good King Edward has died?	Doth this news hold of good King Edwards death?
Yes, sir, its all too true, God help us.	Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.
Then, gentlemen, we can count on trouble.	Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
No, no, with Gods help, his son will be king.	No, no, by Gods good grace, his son shall reign.
Its bad news when a country is ruled by a child.	Woe to the land thats governed by a child.
His counselors will govern as long as hes a minor, and then hell take over. It shouldnt go so badly.	In him there is a hope of government, Which, in his nonage, council under him, And, in his full and ripened years, himself, No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
Last night, I hear, they stayed in Stony Stratford. Tonight they will rest in Northhampton. Theyll be here tomorrow or the next day.	Last night, I hear, they lay at Stony Stratford, And at Northampton they do rest tonight. Tomorrow or next day they will be here.
Im dying to see the prince. I hope hes grown a lot since I last saw him.	I long with all my heart to see the prince. I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
But I hear he hasnt. They say my son York has almost passed him in height.	But I hear no; they say my son of York Has almost overta'en him in his growth.
Yes, mother, but I wish I hadnt.	Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
Why, dear child? Its good to grow.	Why, my young cousin? It is good to grow.
Grandmother, one night when we were eating dinner, my uncle Rivers mentioned that I had grown more than my brother. Yes, said my uncle Gloucester, Small plants are graceful, while ugly weeds grow fast. And since then, Ive wished I wouldnt grow so fast, because sweet flowers are slow while the weeds grow in a hurry.	Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper, My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow More than my brother: Ay, quoth my uncle Gloucester, Small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace. And since, methinks I would not grow so fast Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.
Well, it certainly wasnt true for Richard! As a child, he took such a long time to grow up that, according to his rule, he should have grown up into a gracious adult.	Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold In him that did object the same to thee! He was the wretchedst thing when he was young, So long a-growing and so leisurely, That if this rule were true, he should be gracious.
And no doubt he is, gracious madam.	And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, the capital of the king.	Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.
Welcome, dear nephew, king of all my thoughts. The tiring journey seems to have made you gloomy.	(to PRINCE) Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign. The weary way hath made you melancholy.
It wasnt the journey itself, uncle, but the troubles we encountered that made it wearisome and dull. I want more uncles here to welcome me.	No, uncle, but our crosses on the way Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy. I want more uncles here to welcome me.
Sweet prince, youre just an innocent child. You dont really understand how capable people are of trickery. All you know is what a man shows you, which has little to do with what hes really thinking. Those uncles that you wish were here were dangerous. Your Grace heard their saccharine words, but didnt take note of their poisonous intentions. God protect you from them and from other false friends!	Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years Hath not yet dived into the worlds deceit; Nor more can you distinguish of a man Than of his outward show, which, God He knows, Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. Those uncles which you want were dangerous. Your Grace attended to their sugared words But looked not on the poison of their hearts. God keep you from them, and from such false friends.
God should keep me from false friends, but they werent false.	God keep me from false friends, but they were none.
My lord, the mayor of London is here to greet you.	My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.
(knocking) My lord, my lord.	(knocking) My lord, my lord.
(offstage) Whos knocking?	(within) Who knocks?
A messenger from Lord Stanley.	One from the Lord Stanley.
(offstage)What time is it?	(within) What is t oclock?
Four o'clock in the morning.	Upon the stroke of four.
Cant Lord Stanley sleep?	Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?
I guess notfor good reason, as youll soon hear. First, he sends his regards.	So it appears by that I have to say. First, he commends him to your noble self.
And then?	What then?
And then he said to tell you that tonight he dreamed the duke of Gloucester cut off his helmetthat is, his head. Besides that, he says that two meetings are going to be held tomorrow, and something may be decided at one of them that may make you and him, who are at the other, sorry. He wants to know if instead of going to the meeting, youll get on your horse and ride north with him to get out of harms way.	Then certifies your Lordship that this night He dreamt the boar had razd his helm Besides, he says there are two councils kept, And that may be determined at the one Which may make you and him to rue at th' other. Therefore he sends to know your Lordships pleasure, If you will presently take horse with him And with all speed post with him toward the north To shun the danger that his soul divines.
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell you this. Today you will witness a person die for truth, duty, and loyality.	Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this: Today shalt thou behold a subject die For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
(to RATCLIFFE) God protect the prince from all of you. Youre a group of damned bloodsuckers!	(to RATCLIFFE) God bless the prince from all the pack of you! A knot you are of damnd bloodsuckers.
(to RATCLIFFE) Youll live to regret this.	(to RATCLIFFE) You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.
Hurry up. Your lives are over.	Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.
Oh, Pomfret, Pomfret! Oh, you bloody prison, fatal and threatening to noble lords! Within these guilty walls, Richard II was hacked to death. And now, to add more blood to its name, were losing our innocent lives here.	O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison, Fatal and ominous to noble peers! Within the guilty closure of thy walls, Richard the Second here was hacked to death, And, for more slander to thy dismal seat, We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
Now Margarets curse has fallen on our heads, for standing by and doing nothing when Richard stabbed her son.	Now Margarets curse is fall'n upon our heads, When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I, For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.
She cursed Richard then. She cursed Buckingham then. She cursed Hastings then. Oh God, remember to hear her prayer for them, just as for us! But dont kill my sister and her royal sons, be satisfied, dear God, with our blood, which is being spilled unjustly, as you know.	Then cursed she Richard, then cursed she Buckingham. Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God, To hear her prayer for them, as now for us! And for my sister and her princely sons, Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood, Which, as thou knowst, unjustly must be spilt.
Now, noble lords, the reason were meeting is to determine the day the prince will be crowned. In Gods name, speak. When should the royal day be?	Now, noble peers. the cause why we are met Is to determine of the coronation. In Gods name, speak. When is the royal day?
Is everything ready for that event?	Is all things ready for the royal time?
It is. All we have to do is name the day.	It is, and wants but nomination.
Tomorrows a good day.	Tomorrow, then, I judge a happy day.
Who knows what the Lord Protector thinks? Whos closest to him?	Who knows the Lord Protectors mind herein? Who is most inward with the noble duke?
You, I think, would best know what hes thinking.	Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
We know each others faces, but as for our thoughts, he doesnt know any more about my thinking than I do about yours or hisor you do about mine. Lord Hastings, you and he are close.	We know each others faces; for our hearts, He knows no more of mine than I of yours, Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine. Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
Thank you. I know he holds me dear, but I havent asked him about the coronation, and he hasnt told me. But you, my noble lords, may name a time, and Ill second it on the dukes behalf, which I dont think hell mind.	I thank his Grace. I know he loves me well. But for his purpose in the coronation, I have not sounded him, nor he delivered His gracious pleasure any way therein. But you, my honorable lords, may name the time, And in the dukes behalf Ill give my voice, Which I presume hell take in gentle part.
Tell me, cousin, I need to know if you can shake like youve got a fever, turn pale all of a sudden, and stop speaking in the middle of a wordas if you were driven crazy with fear.	Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy color, Murder thy breath in the middle of a word, And then begin again, and stop again, As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?
Oh please, I can imitate the best tragic actor around. I can speak and then look all around, and tremble, and start at a mere piece of straw as if I were paranoid. Frightening looks are also at my service, as are fake smiles. Anytime I need them, theyre waiting to do my bidding. But has Catesby gone?	Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian, Speak, and look back, and pry on every side, Tremble and start at wagging of a straw, Intending deep suspicion. Ghastly looks Are at my service, like enforcd smiles, And both are ready in their offices, At any time to grace my stratagems. But what, is Catesby gone?
He has. But here he is, back with the mayor.	He is; and see, he brings the mayor along.
Lord Mayor	Lord Mayor
Watch out for the drawbridgeRichard and Buckingham are pretending they are under attack.drawbridge over there!	Look to the drawbridge there!
Listen! A drum!	Hark, a drum!
Catesby, look over the top of these walls to see if anyones there.	Catesby, o'erlook the walls.
Heres the indictment of the good Lord Hastings, which has been written out in a clear hand, like any legal document, so it can be read aloud in public outside St. Pauls Cathedral. And look how well this sequence of events holds together: after Catesby brought the indictment to me last night, I spent eleven hours copying it. The original took just as long to write out. So thats twenty-two hours. And yet five hours ago, Lord Hastings was alive, untouched, free, at liberty. What a backward world we live in! Why, whos so stupid that he cant see through this fraud? But whos so blind to the consequences of speaking out that hell admit what he knows? The world is a bad place, where you cant speak what you know.	This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings, Which in a set hand fairly is engrossed, That it may be today read o'er in Pauls. And mark how well the sequel hangs together: Eleven hours I have spent to write it over, For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me; The precedent was full as long a-doing, And yet within these five hours Hastings lived, Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty. Heres a good world the while. Who is so gross That cannot see this palpable device? Yet who so bold but says he sees it not? Bad is the world, and all will come to naught When such ill dealing must be seen in thought.
So what did the citizens say?	How now, how now? What say the citizens?
Its incrediblethey didnt say a word.	Now, by the holy mother of our Lord, The citizens are mum, say not a word.
Did you mention that Edwards children are bastards?	Touched you the bastardy of Edwards children?
I did. I talked about how he was engaged to Lady LucyEdward IV was engaged to Elizabeth Lucy and had a child with her before he married Elizabeth Grey.Lady Lucy, and how he was engaged to Lady BonaEdward sent Warwick to secure this French marriage and then backed out of it.Lady Bonathrough the help of the earl of Warwick. I spoke of the unquenchable greediness of Edwards desires and the way he forced himself on the wives of Londoners. I mentioned the way he punished people harshly for minor offenses. I said he was not the son of the noble duke of York, because your father was in France when he was conceived, which explains why he doesnt have anything in common with his father. And then I suggested that you were the spitting image of your father, both in the way you look and in the nobleness of your character. I went into all your victories in Scotland, your skill as a warrior, your wisdom in peacetime, your generosity, your goodness, and your exceptional modesty. Indeed, I left nothing out. And when my oration came to a close, I asked those who loved their country to cry, God save Richard, Englands royal king!	I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy And his contract by deputy in France; Th' unsatiate greediness of his desire And his enforcement of the city wives; His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy, As being got, your father then in France, His resemblance being not like the duke. Withal, I did infer your lineaments, Being the right idea of your father, Both in your form and nobleness of mind; Laid open all your victories in Scotland, Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace, Your bounty, virtue, fair humility; Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose Untouched or slightly handled in discourse. And when mine oratory grew toward end, I bid them that did love their countrys good Cry God save Richard, Englands royal king!
And did they?	And did they so?
Whos this? My granddaughter, with her kind aunt, the duchess of Gloucester, leading her by the hand? Now, on my life, the young child must be headed to the Tower to greet the young princes, whom she adores. Daughter, how nice to see you.	Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester? Now, for my life, shes wandering to the Tower, On pure hearts love, to greet the tender prince. Daughter, well met.
Good afternoon!	God give your Graces both A happy and a joyful time of day.
The same to you, good sister. Where are you going?	As much to you, good sister. Whither away?
Just to the TowerIm guessing, for the same reason you are: to salute the noble princes who are staying there.	No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess, Upon the like devotion as yourselves, To gratulate the gentle princes there.
Yes, kind sister. We can all go together.	Kind sister, thanks. Well enter all together.
	Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave, How doth the prince and my young son of York?
Theyre just fine, my dear madam. But Im sorryIm not allowed to let you visit them. The king has strictly forbidden it.	Right well, dear madam. By your patience, I may not suffer you to visit them. The king hath strictly charged the contrary.
Everyone stand aside.Cousin Buckingham.	Stand all apart. Cousin of Buckingham.
My gracious king.	My gracious sovereign.
Give me your hand.	Give me thy hand.
	And thy assistance is King Richard seated. But shall we wear these glories for a day, Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
Let them last forever.	Still live they, and forever let them last.
Oh Buckingham, now Im going to test to see if youre truly made of gold. Young Prince Edward is still alivewhat do you think Im going to say next?	Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch, To try if thou be current gold indeed. Young Edward lives; think now what I would speak.
Go on, my loving lord.	Say on, my loving lord.
Why, Buckingham, I say I want to be king.	Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king,
Why, you are king, your highness.	Why so you are, my thrice-renownd lord.
Ha! Am I king? I guess I am. But Edward is still alive.	Ha! Am I king? 'Tis sobut Edward lives.
True, noble prince.	True, noble prince.
The tyrants bloody request has been met. It was the most ruthless massacre this country has ever been guilty of. Dighton and Forrest, whom I hired to perform the butchery, are used to killing people, the bloody dogs. But they melted with tenderness and human compassion, weeping like children, when they described what theyd done. The tender babes lay like this, said Dighton. Like this, said Forrest, with their innocent white arms around each other. Their lips, like four red roses on a stalk, touched. A prayer book lay on their pillow, which said Forrest, almost made me change my mind. But, oh, the devilthere he stopped talking and Dighton took up where he left off: We smothered the perfect, most sweet work of nature. The two men were both destroyed by remorse. They couldnt speak. So I left them to bring the news to the murderous king. And here he comes.	The tyrannous and bloody act is done, The most arch deed of piteous massacre That ever yet this land was guilty of. Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn To do this piece of ruthless butchery, Albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs, Melted with tenderness and mild compassion, Wept like two children in their deaths' sad story. O thus quoth Dighton, lay those gentle babes. Thus, thus, quoth Forrest, girdling one another Within their alabaster innocent arms. Their lips were four red roses on a stalk, And in their summer beauty kissed each other. A book of prayers on their pillow lay, Which once, quoth Forrest, almost changed my mind, But O, the devilThere the villain stopped; When Dighton thus told on: We smotherd The most replenishd sweet work of nature That from the prime creation e'er she framed. Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse; They could not speak; and so I left them both To bear this tidings to the bloody king.
	
Kind Tyrrel, will your news make me happy?	Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
So now the good times have ripened and grown rotten. Ive lurked in the shadows here to watch the downfall of my enemies. Ive been watching the terrible prologue to a scene that I hope will prove dark and tragic. Ill head to France soon. Its time to hide, wretched Margaret. Whos coming?	So now prosperity begins to mellow And drop into the rotten mouth of death. Here in these confines slyly have I lurked To watch the waning of mine enemies. A dire induction am I witness to, And will to France, hoping the consequence Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes here?
Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes, my flowers who didnt even get a chance to bloom. If your gentle souls are still flying in the air and have not yet landed where they will remain forever, hover around me with your airy wings and hear your mothers lament.	Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes, My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets, If yet your gentle souls fly in the air And be not fixed in doom perpetual, Hover about me with your airy wings And hear your mothers lamentation.
Hover about her and tell her she got what she deserved, with her children dead before their time.	Hover about her; say that right for right Hath dimmed your infant morn to agd night.
Ive been crazed with so many miseries that my tongue has tired of lamenting and gone mute. Edward Plantagenet, why are you dead?	So many miseries have crazed my voice That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute. Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
(to herself) One Plantagenet pays for the other. One Edward dies to pay a debt for the other Edward who died.	(aside) Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet; Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
Sir Christopher, relay this message to Richmond: My son George Stanley is penned up in the bloody boars sty. If I revolt, off goes young Georges head. My fear of that prevents me from helping Richmond at this time. But, tell me, where is the noble Richmond now?	Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me: That in the sty of the most deadly boar My son George Stanley is franked up in hold; If I revolt, off goes young Georges head; The fear of that holds off my present aid. So get three gone. Commend me to thy lord. Withal, say that the queen hath heartily consented He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter. But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
At Pembroke, or at Harfordwest in Wales.	At Pembroke, or at Ha'rfordwest in Wales.
Which noblemen have joined him?	What men of name resort to him?
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier; Sir Gilbert Talbot; Sir William Stanley; Oxford; the highly feared Pembroke; Sir James Blunt; Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew; and many other famous and powerful noblemen. They plan to head straight to London, assuming they dont encounter any resistance on the way.	Sir Walter Herbert, a renownd soldier; Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley, Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt, And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew, And many other of great name and worth; And towards London they do bend their power, If by the way they be not fought withal.
(giving him a paper) Return to your lord. Give him my best regards. Tell him the queen has given her heartfelt consent to his marriage to her daughter, Elizabeth. And these letters will let him know what my thinking is. Goodbye, and take care.	(gives him a paper) Well, hie thee to thy lord. I kiss his hand. My letter will resolve him of my mind. Farewell.
Wont King Richard let me speak with him?	Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
No, my good lord. So be calm.	No, my good lord. Therefore be patient.
Hastings and Edwards children, Rivers and Grey, holy King Henry and your fine son Edward, Vaughan, and all who have died from underhanded, corrupt, fiendish injustice, if your angry souls are witnessing this moment through the clouds, enjoy the revengelaugh at my ruin! This is All-SoulsA Catholic day of prayer for souls stuck in between Heaven and HellAll-Souls day, fellows, isnt it?	Hastings and Edwards children, Grey and Rivers, Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward, Vaughan, and all that have miscarrid By underhand, corrupted, foul injustice, If that your moody, discontented souls Do through the clouds behold this present hour, Even for revenge mock my destruction. This is All Souls' Day, fellow, is it not?
It is, my lord.	It is.
Why, then, its my bodys doomsday. Today Im going to get what I said I wished would happen to me if I was ever false to King Edwards children or his wifes allies. This is the day Im going to get what I wished for when I wished that the person I most trusted would betray me. This, this All-Souls' day, is my just desserts. I tried to play games with God, and he turned my fake prayer on my head, giving me for real what Id asked for as a joke.	Why, then All Souls' Day is my bodys doomsday. This is the day which, in King Edwards time, I wished might fall on me when I was found False to his children and his wifes allies. This is the day wherein I wished to fall By the false faith of him who most I trusted. This, this All Souls' Day to my fearful soul Is the determined respite of my wrongs. That high All-seer which I dallied with Hath turned my feignd prayer on my head And given in earnest what I begged in jest.
Fellow soldiers and my loyal friends suffering under that tyrant Richard, we have marched all the way to the center of England without encountering any opposition. And now we receive encouraging news from my stepfather Stanley: Richardthat violent, greedy boar who roots through your summer fields and ripening vines, guzzles your warm blood, and makes his trough in your disemboweled belliesis now near the town of Leicester, only one days march from us here in TamworthTamworth is in central England.Tamworth. In Gods name, lets continue on in high spirits, my courageous friends. Our aim is to achieve everlasting peace from this one violent war.	Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends, Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny, Have we marched on without impediment, Thus far into the bowels of the land And here receive we from our father Stanley Lines of fair comfort and encouragement. The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar, That spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines, Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough In your embowelled bosomsthis foul swine Is now even in the center of this isle, Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn. From Tamworth thither is but one days march. In Gods name, cheerly on, courageous friends, To reap the harvest of perpetual peace By this one bloody trial of sharp war.
Every mans conscience is a thousand swords against this murderer.	Every mans conscience is a thousand men, To fight against this guilty homicide.
I suspect his friends will join us.	I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
He has no friends except those who are too afraid to defy him. In his greatest need, even they will desert him.	He hath no friends but who are friends for fear. Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
All to our advantage. So, in Gods name, lets march. Hope with good cause is swift; it flies as fast as a swallow. It turns kings into gods and men of lower rank into kings.	All for our vantage. Then, in Gods name, march. True hope is swift, and flies with swallows wings. Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
Lets pitch our tents right here in Bosworth Field. My Lord of Surrey, why do you look so sad?	Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field. My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.	My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk	My Lord of Norfolk
Here, most gracious king.	Here, most gracious liege.
Norfolk, were going to have a few blows, right?	Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?
Weve got to give them and take them, my lord.	We must both give and take, my loving lord.
Put my tent up! Ill lie here tonight. But where will I lie tomorrow? Well, it doesnt matter. Does anyone know the number of the enemys troops?	Up with my tent!Here will I lie tonight. But where tomorrow? Well, alls one for that. Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
Six or seven thousand, at most.	Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
Why, our troops amount to three times that. Besides, the kings name is a tower of strength; the opposition doesnt have that advantage. Put up my tent! Come, noble gentlemen, let us look at our battle plan and get some experienced officers to help us figure out the best strategy. Lets be disciplined and not delay, because tomorrow is a busy day.	Why, our battalia trebles that account. Besides, the kings name is a tower of strength Which they upon the adverse party want. Up with the tent!Come, noble gentlemen, Let us survey the vantage of the ground. Call for some men of sound direction. Lets lack no discipline, make no delay, For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
Help, my lord of Norfolk, help, help! The king performs more wonders than seem humanly possible, challenging every enemy he sees. His horse is killed, so hes fighting on foot, risking his life to search out Richmond. Help, dear lord, or the battle will be lost!	Rescue, my lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue! The king enacts more wonders than a man, Daring an opposite to every danger. His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights, Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death. Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!
A horse, a horse, Id give my kingdom for a horse!	A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
Get off the field, my lord. Ill find you another horse.	Withdraw, my lord. Ill help you to a horse.
Peasant, I have gambled my life on this one throw of the dice, and Im willing to take what comes. I think there are six Richmonds on the field. Ive killed five that looked like him, anyway. A horse, a horse! Id give my kingdom for a horse!	Slave, I have set my life upon a cast, And I will stand the hazard of the die. I think there be six Richmonds in the field; Five have I slain today instead of him. A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
God and your work be praised, victorious friends. The day is ours. The bloody dog is dead.	God and your arms be praised, victorious friends! The day is ours; the bloody dog is dead.
(offering him the crown) Courageous Richmond, you fought well. Here, Ive taken back the stolen crown from that violent lowlife so it can grace your brows. Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.	(offering him the crown) Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee. Lo, here this long-usurpd royalty From the dead temples of this bloody wretch Have I plucked off, to grace thy brows withal. Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
Great God of heaven, say amen to all this! But, tell me, is young George Stanley alive?	Great God of heaven, say amen to all! But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester, where, if youd like, we can retreat to.	He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town, Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
Which gentlemen on each side have been killed?	What men of name are slain on either side?
John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers, Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.	John Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers, Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Bury them in a manner appropriate to their noble births. Proclaim that Ill pardon the soldiers who fled if they will return and submit to my rule. As I vowed, I will unite the York and Lancaster families. 	Inter their bodies as becomes their births. Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled That in submission will return to us. And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament, We will unite the white rose and the red. 
In the beautiful city of Verona, where our story takes place, a long-standing hatred between two families erupts into new violence, and citizens stain their hands with the blood of their fellow citizens. Two unlucky children of these enemy families become lovers and commit suicide. Their unfortunate deaths put an end to their parents' feud. For the next two hours, we will watch the story of their doomed love and their parents' anger, which nothing but the childrens deaths could stop. If you listen to us patiently, well make up for everything weve left out in this prologue onstage.	Two households, both alike in dignity (In fair Verona, where we lay our scene), From ancient grudge break to new mutiny, Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. From forth the fatal loins of these two foes A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life, Whose misadventured piteous overthrows Doth with their death bury their parents' strife. The fearful passage of their death-marked love And the continuance of their parents' rage, Which, but their childrens end, naught could remove, Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage The which, if you with patient ears attend, What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Gregory, I swear, we cant let them humiliate us. We wont take their garbage.	Gregory, on my word, well not carry coals.
(teasing SAMPSON) No, because then wed be garbagemen.	No, for then we should be colliers.
What I mean is, if they make us angry well pull out our swords.	I mean, an we be in choler, well draw.
Maybe you should focus on pulling yourself out of trouble, Sampson.	Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
I hit hard when Im angry.	I strike quickly, being moved.
But its hard to make you angryGregory continually implies that Sampson isnt as tough as hes acting.angry.	But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
One of those dogs from the Montague house can make me angry.	A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Angry enough to run away. You wont stand and fight.	To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runnst away.
A dog from that house will make me angry enough to take a stand. If I pass one of them on the street, Ill take the side closer to the wall and let him walk in the gutter.	A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I willtake the wall of any man or maid of Montagues.
(continuing a conversation) But Montague has sworn an oath just like I have, and hes under the same penalty. I dont think it will be hard for men as old as we are to keep the peace.	But Montague is bound as well as I, In penalty alike. And tis not hard, I think, For men so old as we to keep the peace.
You both have honorable reputations, and its too bad youve been enemies for so long. But what do you say to my request?	Of honorable reckoning are you both. And pity tis you lived at odds so long. But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
I can only repeat what Ive said before. My daughter is still very young. Shes not even fourteen years old. Lets wait two more summers before we start thinking shes ready to get married.	But saying o'er what I have said before. My child is yet a stranger in the world. She hath not seen the change of fourteen years. Let two more summers wither in their pride Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Girls younger than she often marry and become happy mothers.	Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Girls who marry so young grow up too soon. But go ahead and charm her, gentle Paris; make her love you. My permission is only part of her decision. If she agrees to marry you, my blessing and fair words will confirm her choice. Tonight Im having a feast that weve celebrated for many years. Ive invited many of my closest friends, and Id like to welcome you and add you to the guest list. At my humble house tonight, you can expect to see dazzling stars that walk on the ground and light the sky from below.	And too soon marred are those so early made. Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she. Shes the hopeful lady of my earth. But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart. My will to her consent is but a part. An she agreed within her scope of choice, Lies my consent and fair according voice. This night I hold an old accustomed feast, Whereto I have invited many a guest Such as I love. And you among the store, One more, most welcome, makes my number more. At my poor house look to behold this night Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Nurse, wheres my daughter? Tell her to come to me.	Nurse, wheres my daughter? Call her forth to me.
I swear to you by my virginity at age twelve, I already told her to come. Come on! Where is she? What is she doing? What, Juliet!	Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old I bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird! God forbid! Wheres this girl? What, Juliet!
What is it? Whos calling me?	How now, who calls?
Your mother.	Your mother.
Madam, Im here. What do you want?	Madam, I am here. What is your will?
Ill tell you whats the matterNurse, leave us alone for a little while. We must talk privatelyNurse, come back here. I just remembered, you can listen to our secrets. You know how young my daughter is.	This is the matter.Nurse, give leave awhile, We must talk in secret.Nurse, come back again. I have remembered me. Thous hear our counsel. Thou knowst my daughters of a pretty age.
Yes, I know her age down to the hour.	Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Shes not even fourteen.	Shes not fourteen.
Id bet fourteen of my own teethbut, Im sorry to say, I only have four teethshes not fourteen. How long is it until LammastideLammastide = August 1.Lammastide?	Ill lay fourteen of my teethand yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but fourshe is not fourteen. How long is itnow to Lammastide?
Two weeks and a few odd days.	A fortnight and odd days.
What will we say is our excuse for being here? Or should we enter without apologizing?	What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? Or shall we on without apology?
Its out of fashion to give lengthy explanations like that. Were not going to introduce our dance by having someone dress up as Cupid, blindfolded and carrying a toy bow to frighten the ladies like a scarecrow. Nor are we going to recite a memorized speech to introduce ourselves. Let them judge us however they please. Well give them a dance and then hit the road.	The date is out of such prolixity. Well have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf, Bearing a Tartars painted bow of lath, Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper, Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke After the prompter for our entrance. But let them measure us by what they will. Well measure them a measure and be gone.
Give me a torch. I dont want to dance. I feel sad, so let me be the one who carries the light.	Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling. Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
No, noble Romeo, youve got to dance.	Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Not me, believe me. Youre wearing dancing shoes with nimble soles. My soul is made out of lead, and its so heavy it keeps me stuck on the ground so I cant move.	Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Youre a lover. Take Cupids wings and fly higher than the average man.	You are a lover. Borrow Cupids wings And soar with them above a common bound.
His arrow has pierced me too deeply, so I cant fly high with his cheerful feathers. Because this wound keeps me down, I cant leap any higher than my dull sadness. I sink under the heavy weight of love.	I am too sore enpiercd with his shaft To soar with his light feathers, and so bound, I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. Under loves heavy burden do I sink.
Wheres Potpan? Why isnt he helping us clear the table? He should be moving and scraping plates!	Wheres Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He shift a trencher? He scrape a trencher!
When only one or two men have all the good manners, and even they are dirty, things are bad.	When good manners shall lie all in one or two mens hands,and they unwashed too, tis a foul thing.
Take away the stools, the sideboards, and the plates. You, good friend, save me a piece of marzipan, and if you love me, have the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan!	Away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard,look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane,and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstoneand Nell.Antony and Potpan!
Yes, boy, Im ready.	Ay, boy, ready.
Theyre looking for you in the great chamber.	You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for,in the great chamber.
We cant be in two places at once, both here and there! Cheers, boys. Be quick for a while and let the one who lives the longest take everything.	We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be brisk 0awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Welcome, gentlemen. The ladies who dont have corns on their toes will dance with you. Ha, my ladies, which of you will refuse to dance now? Whichever of you acts shy, Ill swear she has corns. Does that hit close to home? Welcome, gentlemen. There was a time when I could wear a mask over my eyes and charm a lady by whispering a story in her ear. That time is gone, gone, gone. You are welcome gentlemen. Come on, musicians, play music. (music plays and they dance, ROMEO stands apart) Make room in the hall. Make room in the hall. Shake a leg, girls. (to SERVINGMEN) More light, you rascals. Flip over the tables and get them out of the way. And put the fire outits getting too hot in here. (to his COUSIN) Ah, my man, this unexpected fun feels good. No, sit down, sit down, my good Capulet cousin. You and I are too old to dance. (CAPULET and his COUSIN sit down) How long is it now since you and I last wore masks at a party like this?	Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes Ah, my mistresses! Which of you all Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you. Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty, She, Ill swear, hath corns. Am I come near ye now? Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day That I have worn a visor and could tell A whispering tale in a fair ladys ear Such as would please. 'Tis gone, tis gone, tis gone. You are welcome, gentlemen.Come, musicians, play. (music plays and they dance) A hall, a hall, give room!And foot it, girls. More light, you knaves! And turn the tables up, And quench the fire. The room is grown too hot. Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well. Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet, For you and I are past our dancing days. How long is t now since last yourself and I Were in a mask?
Now Romeos old feelings of desire are dying, and a new desire is eager to take their place. Romeo groaned for the beautiful Rosaline and said he would die for her, but compared with tender Juliet, Rosaline doesnt seem beautiful now. Now someone loves Romeo, and hes in love againboth of them falling for each others' good looks. But he has to make his speeches of love to a woman whos supposed to be his enemy. And shes been hooked by someone she should fear. Because hes an enemy, Romeo has no chance to see Juliet and say the things a lover normally says. And Juliets just as much in love as he, but she has even less opportunity to meet her lover. But love gives them power, and time gives them the chance to meet, sweetening the extreme danger with intense pleasure.	Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, And young affection gapes to be his heir. That fair for which love groaned for and would die With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair. Now Romeo is beloved and loves again, Alike bewitchd by the charm of looks, But to his foe supposed he must complain, And she steal loves sweet bait from fearful hooks. Being held a foe, he may not have access To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear. And she as much in love, her means much less To meet her new beloved anywhere. But passion lends them power, time means, to meet, Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
Can I go away while my heart stays here? I have to go back to where my heart is.	Can I go forward when my heart is here? Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.
(calling) Romeo, my cousin, Romeo, Romeo!	Romeo, my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Hes a smart boy. I bet he slipped away and went home to bed.	He is wise, And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
He ran this way and jumped over this orchard wall. Call to him, Mercutio.	He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall. Call, good Mercutio.
Ill conjure him as if I were summoning a spirit. Romeo! Madman! Passion! Lover! Show yourself in the form of a sigh. Speak one rhyme, and Ill be satisfied. Just cry out, Ah me! Just say love and dove. Say just one lovely word to my good friend VenusVenus is the Roman goddess of love.Venus. Just say the nickname of her blind son Cupid, the one who shot arrows so well in the old story.Romeo doesnt hear me. He doesnt stir. He doesnt move. The silly ape is dead, but I must make him appear.I summon you by Rosalines bright eyes, by her high forehead and her red lips, by her fine feet, by her straight legs, by her trembling thighs, and by the regions right next to her thighs. In the name of all of these things, I command you to appear before us in your true form.	Nay, Ill conjure too! Romeo! Humours, madman, passion, lover! Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh! Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied. Cry but Ay me! Pronounce but love and dove. Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word, One nickname for her purblind son and heir, Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so true When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid. He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not. The ape is dead, and I must conjure him. I conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes, By her high forehead and her scarlet lip, By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh, And the demesnes that there adjacent lie, That in thy likeness thou appear to us.
Its easy for someone to joke about scars if theyve never been cut.	He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
Dont be her maid, because she is jealous. Virginity makes her look sick and green. Only fools hold on to their virginity. Let it go. Oh, theres my lady! Oh, it is my love. Oh, I wish she knew how much I love her. Shes talking, but shes not saying anything. So what? Her eyes are saying something. I will answer them. I am too bold. Shes not talking to me. Two of the brightest stars in the whole sky had to go away on business, and theyre asking her eyes to twinkle in their places until they return. What if her eyes were in the sky and the stars were in her head?The brightness of her cheeks would outshine the stars the way the sun outshines a lamp. If her eyes were in the night sky, they would shine so brightly through space that birds would start singing, thinking her light was the light of day. Look how she leans her hand on her cheek. Oh, I wish I was the glove on that hand so that I could touch that cheek.	It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, Who is already sick and pale with grief, That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she. Be not her maid since she is envious. Her vestal livery is but sick and green, And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off! It is my lady. Oh, it is my love. Oh, that she knew she were! She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that? Her eye discourses. I will answer it. I am too bold. 'Tis not to me she speaks. Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven, Having some business, do entreat her eyes To twinkle in their spheres till they return. What if her eyes were there, they in her head? The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars As daylight doth a lamp. Her eye in heaven Would through the airy region stream so bright That birds would sing and think it were not night. See how she leans her cheek upon her hand. Oh, that I were a glove upon that hand That I might touch that cheek!
Oh, my!	Ay me!
The smiling morning is replacing the frowning night. Darkness is stumbling out of the suns path like a drunk man. Now, before the sun comes up and burns away the dew, I have to fill this basket of mine with poisonous weeds and medicinal flowers. The Earth is natures mother and also natures tomb. Plants are born out of the Earth, and they are buried in the Earth when they die. From the Earths womb, many different sorts of plants and animals come forth, and the Earth provides her children with many excellent forms of nourishment. Everything nature creates has some special property, and each one is different. Herbs, plants, and stones possess great power. There is nothing on Earth that is so evil that it does not provide the earth with some special quality. And there is nothing that does not turn bad if its put to the wrong use and abused. Virtue turns to vice if its misused. Vice sometimes becomes virtue through the right activity.	The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, Checkering the eastern clouds with streaks of light, And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels From forth days path and Titans fiery wheels. Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye, The day to cheer and nights dank dew to dry, I must upfill this osier cage of ours With baleful weeds and precious-juicd flowers. The earth, thats natures mother, is her tomb. What is her burying, grave that is her womb. And from her womb children of divers kind We sucking on her natural bosom find, Many for many virtues excellent, None but for some and yet all different. Oh, mickle is the powerful grace that lies In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities. For naught so vile that on the earth doth live But to the earth some special good doth give. Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse. Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied, And vice sometime by action dignified.
	Poison hath residence and medicine power. For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart. Two such opposd kings encamp them still, In man as well as herbsgrace and rude will.
Where the devil can Romeo be? Didnt he come home last night?	Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?
Not to his fathers house. I asked a servant.	Not to his fathers. I spoke with his man.
That fair-skinned, hard-hearted hussy, Rosaline is going to torment him until he goes insane.	Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Tybalt, old Capulets nephew, has sent a letter to Romeos fathers house.	Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, Hath sent a letter to his fathers house.
I bet its a challenge.	A challenge, on my life.
Romeo will answer the challenge.	Romeo will answer it.
Any man who knows how to write can answer a letter.	Any man that can write may answer a letter.
No, Romeo will respond to the letters writer, telling him whether he accepts the challenge.	Nay, he will answer the letters master, how he dares, being dared.
Oh, poor Romeo! Hes already dead. Hes been stabbed by a white girls black eye. Hes been cut through the ear with a love song. The center of his heart has been split by blind Cupids arrow. Is he man enough at this point to face off with Tybalt?	Alas, poor Romeo! He is already dead, stabbed with a white wenchs black eye, shot through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boys butt shaft. And is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Why, whats Tybalts story?	Why, what is Tybalt?
Hes tougher than the Prince of CatsThe Prince of Cats is a figure from Medieval lore whose first name was also Tybalt.Prince of Cats. He does everything by the book. He fights like you sing at a recital, paying attention to time, distance, and proportion. He takes the proper breaks: one, two, and the third in your heart. Hes the butcher who can hit any silk button. A master of duels. Hes a gentleman from the finest school of fencing. He knows how to turn any argument into a swordfight. He knowsMercutio lists Italian terms for fencing moves.He knows passadothe forward thrustthe punto reversothe backhand thrustand the haithe thrust that goes straight through.	More than Prince of Cats. Oh, hes the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion. He rests his minim restsone, two, and the third in your bosom. The very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hai!
I sent the Nurse at nine o'clock. Maybe she cant find him. That cant be. Oh, shes slow! Loves messengers should be thoughts, which fly ten times faster than sunbeams. They should be strong enough to push shadows over the dark hills. Thats the way doves carry Venus so fast, and thats why Cupid has wings that let him fly as fast as the wind. Now its noon. Thats three hours since nine o'clock, but she hasnt come back. If she was young and passionate, shed move as fast as a ball. My words would bounce her to my sweet love, and his words would bounce her back to me. But a lot of old people act like theyre already deadsluggish, slow, fat, and colorless, like lead.	The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse. In half an hour she promised to return. Perchance she cannot meet him. Thats not so. Oh, she is lame! Loves heralds should be thoughts, Which ten times faster glide than the suns beams, Driving back shadows over louring hills. Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw love And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings. Now is the sun upon the highmost hill Of this days journey, and from nine till twelve Is three long hours, yet she is not come. Had she affections and warm youthful blood, She would be as swift in motion as a ball. My words would bandy her to my sweet love, And his to me. But old folks, many feign as they were dead, Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.
	Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Peter, wait for me at the gate.	Peter, stay at the gate.
Now, good sweet NurseOh Lord, why do you look so sad? Even if the news is sad, tell me with a smile on your face. If the news is good, youre ruining the sweet news by playing a trick with a sour face like that.	Now, good sweet Nurse O Lord, why lookst thou sad? Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily. If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news By playing it to me with so sour a face.
May the heavens be happy with this holy act of marriage, so nothing unfortunate happens later to make us regret it.	So smile the heavens upon this holy act That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.
Amen, amen. But whatever misfortunes occur, they cant ruin the joy I feel with one look at her. All you have to do is join our hands with holy words, then love-destroying death can do whatever it pleases. Its enough for me if I can call her mine.	Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can, It cannot countervail the exchange of joy That one short minute gives me in her sight. Do thou but close our hands with holy words, Then love-devouring death do what he dare; It is enough I may but call her mine.
These sudden joys have sudden endings. They burn up in victory like fire and gunpowder. When they meet, as in a kiss, they explode. Too much honey is delicious, but it makes you sick to your stomach. Therefore, love each other in moderation. That is the key to long-lasting love. Too fast is as bad as too slow.	These violent delights have violent ends And in their triumph die, like fire and powder, Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey Is loathsome in his own deliciousness And in the taste confounds the appetite. Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so. Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
	Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint. A lover may bestride the gossamers That idles in the wanton summer air, And yet not fall. So light is vanity.
Good evening, my spiritual confessor.	Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Romeo will thank you, my girl, for both of us.	Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Im begging you, good Mercutio, lets call it a day. Its hot outside, and the Capulets are wandering around. If we bump into them, well certainly get into a fight. When its hot outside, people become angry and hot-blooded.	I pray thee, good Mercutio, lets retire. The day is hot; the Capulets, abroad; And if we meet we shall not scape a brawl, For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Youre like one of those guys who walks into a bar, slams his sword on the table, and then says, I pray I never have to use you. By the time he orders his second drink, he pulls his sword on the bartender for no reason at all.	Thou art like one of those fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says God send me no need of thee! and, by the operation of the second cup, draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.
Am I really like one of those guys?	Am I like such a fellow?
Come on, you can be as angry as any guy in Italy when youre in the mood. When someone does the smallest thing to make you angry, you get angry. And when youre in the mood to get angry, you find something to get angry about.	Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
And what about that?	And what to?
If there were two men like you, pretty soon thered be none because the two of you would kill each other. You would fight with a man if he had one more whisker or one less whisker in his beard than you have in your beard. Youll fight with a man whos cracking nuts just because you have hazelnut-colored eyes. Only you would look for a fight like that. Your head is as full of fights as an egg is full of yolk, but your head has been beaten like scrambled eggs from so much fighting. You started a fight with a man who coughed in the street because he woke up a dog that was sleeping in the sun. Didnt you argue it out with your tailor for wearing one of his new suits before the right season? And with another for tying the new shoes he made with old laces? And yet youre the one who wants to teach me about restraint!	Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou, why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thou hast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With another, for tying his new shoes with old ribbon? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!
	Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, Toward Phoebus' lodging. Such a wagoner As Phaeton would whip you to the west And bring in cloudy night immediately. Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, That runaways' eyes may wink, and Romeo Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen. Lovers can see to do their amorous rites By their own beauties, or, if love be blind, It best agrees with night. Come, civil night, Thou sober-suited matron, all in black, And learn me how to lose a winning match Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. Hood my unmanned blood bating in my cheeks, With thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold, Think true love acted simple modesty. Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in night, For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night Whiter than new snow upon a ravens back. Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-browed night, Give me my Romeo. And when I shall die, Take him and cut him out in little stars, And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night And pay no worship to the garish sun. Oh, I have bought the mansion of a love, But not possessed it, and though I am sold, Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day As is the night before some festival To an impatient child that hath new robes And may not wear them.
Romeo, come out. Come out, you frightened man. Trouble likes you, and youre married to disaster.	Romeo, come forth. Come forth, thou fearful man. Affliction is enamoured of thy parts, And thou art wedded to calamity.
Father, whats the news? What punishment did the Prince announce? What suffering lies in store for me that I dont know about yet?	Father, what news? What is the Princes doom? What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand That I yet know not?
You know too much about suffering. I have news for you about the Princes punishment.	Too familiar Is my dear son with such sour company. I bring thee tidings of the Princes doom.
Is the Princes punishment any less awful than doomsday?	What less than doomsday is the Princes doom?
He made a gentler decision. You wont die, but youll be banished from the city.	A gentler judgment vanished from his lips: Not bodys death, but bodys banishment.
Ha, banishment? Be merciful and say death. Exile is much worse than death. Dont say banishment.	Ha, banishment! Be merciful, say death, For exile hath more terror in his look, Much more than death. Do not say banishment.
From now on, you are banished from Verona. You should be able to endure this because the world is broad and wide.	Hence from Verona art thou banishd. Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world for me outside the walls of Verona, except purgatory, torture, and hell itself. So to be banished from Verona is like being banished from the world, and being banished from the world is death.	There is no world without Verona walls But purgatory, torture, hell itself. Hence banishd is banished from the world, And worlds exile is death. Then banishd,
Things have turned out so unluckily, sir, that we havent had time to convince our daughter to marry you. Listen, she loved her cousin Tybalt dearly, and so did I. Well, we were all born to die. Its very late, she wont be coming downstairs tonight. Believe me, if you werent here visiting me, I myself would have gone to bed an hour ago.	Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, That we have had no time to move our daughter. Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly, And so did I. Well, we were born to die. 'Tis very late. Shell not come down tonight. I promise you, but for your company, I would have been abed an hour ago.
These times of pain are bad times for romance. Madam, good night. Give my regards to your daughter.	These times of woe afford no time to woo. Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
I will. And Ill find out what she thinks about marriage early tomorrow. Tonight she is shut up in her room, alone with her sadness.	I will, and know her mind early tomorrow. Tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.
Sir Paris, Ill make a desperate argument for my childs love. I think shell do whatever I say. No, I think shell do all that and more. I have no doubt about it. Wife, visit her in her room before you go to bed. Tell her about my son Pariss love for her. And tell her, listen to me, on WednesdayWaitWhat day is today?	Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender Of my childs love. I think she will be ruled In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not. Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed. Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love, And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next But, soft! What day is this?
Monday, my lord.	Monday, my lord.
Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon. Let it be on Thursday. On Thursday, tell her, shell be married to this noble earl. Will you be ready? Do you think its a good idea to rush? We shouldnt have too big a celebrationwe can invite a friend or two. Listen, because Tybalt was just killed, people might think that we dont care about his memory as our relative if we have too grand a party. Therefore well have about half a dozen friends to the wedding, and thats it. What do you think about Thursday?	Monday! Ha, ha. Well, Wednesday is too soon, O' Thursday let it be.O' Thursday, tell her, She shall be married to this noble earl. Will you be ready? Do you like this haste? Well keep no great ado, a friend or two. For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late, It may be thought we held him carelessly, Being our kinsman, if we revel much. Therefore well have some half a dozen friends, And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
Are you going? Its still a long time until daybreak. Dont be afraid. That sound you heard was the nightingaleThe lark sings in the morning, the nightingale sings at night.nightingale, not the lark. Every night the nightingale chirps on that pomegranate-tree. Believe me, my love, it was the nightingale.	Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day. It was the nightingale, and not the lark, That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear. Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate tree. Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
It was the lark, the bird that sings at dawn, not the nightingale. Look, my love, what are those streaks of light in the clouds parting in the east? Night is over, and day is coming. If I want to live, I must go. If I stay, Ill die.	It was the lark, the herald of the morn, No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east. Nights candles are burnt out, and jocund day Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops. I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
That light is not daylight, I know it. Its some meteor coming out of the sun to light your way to Mantua. So stay for a while. You dont have to go yet.	Yon light is not daylight, I know it, I. It is some meteor that the sun exhales To be to thee this night a torchbearer, And light thee on thy way to Mantua. Therefore stay yet. Thou needst not to be gone.
Let me be captured. Let me be put to death. I am content, if thats the way you want it. Ill say the light over there isnt morning. Ill say its the reflection of the moon. Ill say that sound isnt the lark ringing in the sky. I want to stay more than I want to go. Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wants it this way. How are you, my love? Lets talk. Its not daylight.	Let me be ta'en. Let me be put to death. I am content, so thou wilt have it so. Ill say yon grey is not the mornings eye. 'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthias brow. Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat The vaulty heaven so high above our heads. I have more care to stay than will to go. Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so. How is t, my soul? Lets talk. It is not day.
On Thursday, sir? Thats very soon.	On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Thats how my future father-in-law Capulet wants it, and Im not dragging my feet.	My father Capulet will have it so, And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
You say you dont know what the girl thinks. Thats a rocky road to be riding. I dont like it.	You say you do not know the ladys mind. Uneven is the course. I like it not.
Shes grieving too much over the death of Tybalt. So I havent had the chance to talk to her about love. Romantic love doesnt happen when people are in mourning. Now, sir, her father thinks its dangerous that she allows herself to become so sad. Hes being smart by rushing our marriage to stop her from crying. She cries too much by herself. If she had someone to be with her, she would stop crying. Now you know the reason for the rush.	Immoderately she weeps for Tybalts death, And therefore have I little talked of love, For Venus smiles not in a house of tears. Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous That she do give her sorrow so much sway, And in his wisdom hastes our marriage To stop the inundation of her tears Which, too much minded by herself alone, May be put from her by society. Now do you know the reason of this haste.
(to himself) I wish I didnt know the reason why the marriage should be slowed down. Look, sir, here comes the lady walking toward my cell.	(aside) I would I knew not why it should be slowed. Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Im happy to meet you, my lady and my wife.	Happily met, my lady and my wife.
That might be the case sir, after Im married.	That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
(giving the FIRST SERVINGMAN a piece of paper) Invite all the guests on this list.	(gives paper to FIRST SERVINGMAN) So many guests invite as here are writ.
	
You wont get any bad cooks from me. Ill test them by making them lick their fingers.	You shall have none ill, sir, for Ill try if they can lick their fingers.
How can you test them like that?	How canst thou try them so?
Easy, sir. Its a bad cook who cant lick his own fingers. So the cooks who cant lick their fingers arent hired.	Marry, sir, tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
Go, get out of here.	Go, be gone. We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
	
Yes, thats true.	Ay, forsooth.
Well, theres a chance he may do her some good. Shes a stubborn little brat.	Well, he may chance to do some good on her. A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.
Yes, those are the best clothes. But, gentle Nurse, please leave me alone tonight. I have to say a lot of prayers to make the heavens bless me. You know that my life is troubled and full of sin.	Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse, I pray thee, leave me to myself tonight, For I have need of many orisons To move the heavens to smile upon my state, Which, well thou knowst, is cross and full of sin.
What, are you busy? Do you need my help?	What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
No, madam, weve figured out the best things for me to wear tomorrow at the ceremony. So if its okay with you, Id like to be left alone now. Let the Nurse sit up with you tonight. Im sure you have your hands full preparing for the sudden festivities.	No, madam. We have culled such necessaries As are behooveful for our state tomorrow. So please you, let me now be left alone, And let the Nurse this night sit up with you. For, I am sure, you have your hands full all In this so sudden business.
Good night. Go to bed and get some rest. Im sure you need it.	Good night. Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Good-bye. Only God knows when well meet again. There is a slight cold fear cutting through my veins. It almost freezes the heat of life. Ill call them back here to comfort me. Nurse!Oh, what good would she do here? In my desperate situation, I have to act alone.	Farewell!God knows when we shall meet again. I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins That almost freezes up the heat of life. Ill call them back again to comfort me. Nurse!What should she do here?
Wait. Take these keys and get more spices, Nurse.	Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, Nurse.
Theyre calling for dates and quinces in the pastry kitchen.	They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Come on, wake up, wake up, wake up! The second cock crowed. The curfew-bell rang. Its three o'clock. Go get the baked meats, good Angelica. Dont worry about the cost.	Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed. The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock. Look to the baked meats, good Angelica. Spare not for the cost.
Go, you old housewife, go. Go to bed, dear. Youll be sick tomorrow because youve stayed up all night.	Go, you cot-quean, go. Get you to bed, faith. Youll be sick tomorrow For this nights watching.
No, not at all. What? Ive stayed up all night many times before for less important matters, and Ive never gotten sick.	No, not a whit, what. I have watched ere now All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Yes, youve been a ladies' man in your time. But Ill make sure you dont stay up any later now.	Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time, But I will watch you from such watching now.
A jealous woman, a jealous woman!	A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
	What is there?
Mistress! Hey, mistress! Juliet! I bet shes fast asleep. Hey, lamb! Hey, lady! Hey, you lazy bones! Hey, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Hey, bride! What, you dont say a word? You take your beauty sleep now. Get yourself a weeks worth of sleep. Tomorrow night, I bet, Count Paris wont let you get much rest. God forgive me. Alright, and amen. How sound asleep she is! I must wake her up. Madam, madam, madam! Yes, let the count take you in your bed. Hell wake you up, I bet. Wont he? (she opens the bed curtains) What? Youre still dressed in all your clothes. But youre still asleep. I must wake you up. Lady! Lady! Lady! Oh no, oh no! Help, help! My ladys dead! Oh curse the day that I was born! Ho! Get me some brandy! My lord! My lady!	Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!Fast, I warrant her, she. Why, lamb! Why, lady! Fie, you slug-a-bed. Why, love, I say. Madam! Sweet-heart! Why, bride! What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now. Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant, The County Paris hath set up his rest That you shall rest but little.God forgive me, Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep! I must needs wake her.Madam, madam, madam! Ay, let the county take you in your bed. Hell fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be? (opens the bed curtains) What, dressed and in your clothes, and down again? I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady! Alas, alas! Help, help! My ladys dead! Oh, welladay, that ever I was born! Some aqua vitae, ho!My lord! My lady!
Whats all the noise in here?	What noise is here?
Oh, sad day!	O lamentable day!
What is the matter?	What is the matter?
Look, look! Oh, what a sad day!	Look, look. O heavy day!
If I can trust my dreams, then some joyful news is coming soon. Love rules my heart, and all day long a strange feeling has been making me cheerful. I had a dream that my lady came and found me dead. Its a strange dream that lets a dead man think! She came and brought me back to life by kissing my lips. I rose from the dead and was an emperor. Oh my! How sweet it would be to actually have the woman I love, when merely thinking about love makes me so happy.	If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep, My dreams presage some joyful news at hand. My bosoms lord sits lightly in his throne, And all this day an unaccustomed spirit Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. I dreamt my lady came and found me dead Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think And breathed such life with kisses in my lips That I revived and was an emperor. Ah me! How sweet is love itself possessed When but loves shadows are so rich in joy!
	Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? How doth my lady? Is my father well? How fares my Juliet? That I ask again, For nothing can be ill if she be well.
Then she is well, and nothing is wrong. Her body sleeps in the Capulet tomb, and her immortal soul lives with the angels in heaven. I saw her buried in her familys tomb, and then I came here to tell you the news. Oh, pardon me for bringing this bad news, but you told me it was my job, sir.	Then she is well, and nothing can be ill. Her body sleeps in Capels' monument, And her immortal part with angels lives. I saw her laid low in her kindreds vault And presently took post to tell it you. O, pardon me for bringing these ill news, Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, hey!	Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, ho!
That sounds like the voice of Friar John. Welcome back from Mantua. What does Romeo say? Or, if he wrote down his thoughts, give me his letter.	This same should be the voice of Friar John. Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo? Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
I went to find another poor friar from our order to accompany me. He was here in this city visiting the sick. When I found him, the town health officials suspected that we were both in a house that had been hit with the plague. They quarantined the house, sealed up the doors, and refused to let us out. I couldnt go to Mantua because I was stuck there.	Going to find a barefoot brother out, One of our order, to associate me, Here in this city visiting the sick, And finding him, the searchers of the town, Suspecting that we both were in a house Where the infectious pestilence did reign, Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth. So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
Then who took my letter to Romeo?	Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
I couldnt send it. Here it is. (he gives FRIAR LAWRENCE a letter) I couldnt get a messenger to bring it to you either because they were scared of spreading the infection.	I could not send ithere it is again (gives FRIAR LAWRENCE a letter) Nor get a messenger to bring it thee, So fearful were they of infection.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood, the letter was not just a nice greeting. It was full of very important information. Its very dangerous that it hasnt been sent. Friar John, go and get me an iron crowbar. Bring it straight back to my cell.	Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood, The letter was not nice but full of charge, Of dear import, and the neglecting it May do much danger. Friar John, go hence. Get me an iron crow and bring it straight Unto my cell.
Give me your torch, boy. Go away and stay apart from me. Put the torch out, so I cant be seen. Hide under the yew-trees over there. Listen to make sure no one is coming through the graveyard. If you hear any one, whistle to me to signal that someone is approaching. Give me those flowers. Do as I tell you. Go.	Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof. Yet put it out, for I would not be seen. Under yon yew trees lay thee all along, Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread, Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me, As signal that thou hearst something approach. Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
(to himself) I am almost afraid to stand alone here in the graveyard, but Ill take the risk.	(aside) I am almost afraid to stand alone Here in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
(he scatters flowers at JULIETs closed tomb) Sweet flower, Im spreading flowers over your bridal bed. Oh, pain! Your canopy is dust and stones. Ill water these flowers every night with sweet water. Or, if I dont do that, my nightly rituals to remember you will be to put flowers on your grave and weep.	(scatters flowers at JULIET'S closed tomb) Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew O woe! Thy canopy is dust and stones Which with sweet water nightly I will dew. Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans, The obsequies that I for thee will keep Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Its someone with a torch! I must hide in the darkness for awhile. 	What cursd foot wanders this way tonight To cross my obsequies and true loves rite? What with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile. 
Ill fix you, I swear.	Ill pheeze you, in faith.
You thug! Ill call for a pair of stocksThe stocks consisted of a wooden frame in which you could lock a criminals ankles so that he or she couldnt move.stocks!	A pair of stocks, you rogue!
There are no thugs in my family, whore! Read your history! WeSlysSly means William the Conqueror; he is saying he can trace his family back to the time of Englands first king, but gets the name wrong. Slys came over with Richard the Conqueror. Oh, the hell with it. I cant be bothered. Shut up!	Y'are a baggage, the Slys are no rogues. Look inthe chronicleswe came in with Richard Conqueror.Therefore paucas pallabris: let the world slide. Sessa!
You wont pay for the glasses you smashed?	You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
No, not a penny. Get out of my face. Go play with yourself.	No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy. Go to thy cold bed and warm thee.
I know my rights. Ill call a policeman.	I know my remedy. I must go fetch the thirdborough.
Call them all! I have a legal right to be here. Im not moving an inch, pal. Let them comeI dont care.	Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, Ill answer him by law. Ill not budge an inch, boy. Let him come, and kindly.
Huntsman, look after my hounds. Let Merriman catch his breaththe poor dogs foaming at the mouth. And tie up Clowder together with the long-mouthed bitch. (to his page) Did you see, boy, how Silver picked up the scent at the hedge corner, where it was weakest? I wouldnt part with that dog for twenty pounds.	Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds. Breathe Merriman, the poor cur is embossed, And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach. Sawst thou not, boy, how Silver made it good At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault? I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
I think Belman is just as good, my lord. He set up a howl when the scent was lost completely and twice picked it up where it was weakest. I swear hes the better dog.	Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord. He cried upon it at the merest loss, And twice today picked out the dullest scent. Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
Youre a fool. If Echo were as fast, he would be worth a dozen like Belman. But give them all a good dinner and look after them well. Ill go hunting again tomorrow, I think.	Thou art a fool. If Echo were as fleet, I would esteem him worth a dozen such. But sup them well and look unto them all. Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
I will, my lord.	I will, my lord.
Whats this? A drunkard or a corpse? Check and see if hes breathing.	Whats here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?
He is, my lord. But this would be too cold a place to sleep if he hadnt warmed himself with ale.	He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmed with ale, This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
Its disgusting, sleeping that waylike a pig in the gutter! Alas, grim death, how vile and ugly your near-twin, sleep, is! Gentlemen, I think Ill play a trick on this lout. What do you think? Say we were to carry him to one of the bedrooms, put fresh clothes on him and rings on his fingers, lay out a wonderful feast by his bed, and have servants in fancy dress near him when he wakes upwouldnt the poor tramp be confused?	O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies! Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image! Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man. What think you: if he were conveyed to bed, Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers, A most delicious banquet by his bed, And brave attendants near him when he wakes, Would not the beggar then forget himself?
I dont think hed have any choice, my lord.	Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
When he woke, he wouldnt know where he was.	It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
It would be just like a nice daydream or fantasy. Well, take him on up and well try to pull it off. Carry him to my best roomgently, so he doesnt wakeand hang all my erotic paintings around him. Bathe his filthy head with warm, scented water. Burn fragrant wood to give the room a pleasant smell, and have musicians at hand, ready to produce sweet, soothing sounds when he awakes. You want to be ready in case he speaks. If he does, bow low and say deferentially, What would your Honor have us do? Have one servant wait on him with a basin of rosewater (throw in some petals), have another servant carry a pitcher, and a third a cloth. Say, Would your Lordship care to freshen up? Have someone standing by with expensive clothes, and ask him what hed care to wear. Have another servant tell him about the dogs and horses that he owns and that his wife is grief-stricken over his illness. Convince him that he has been out of his mindand when he says hes out of his mind now, tell him hes mistaken and that he is in fact a mighty lord. Do thismake it convincingand well have fun. It could work if its done subtly.	Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy. Then take him up and manage well the jest. Carry him gently to my fairest chamber And hang it round with all my wanton pictures. Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet. Procure me music ready when he wakes, To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound. And if he chance to speak, be ready straight And with a low submissive reverence Say, What is it your Honor will command? Let one attend him with a silver basin Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers, Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper, And say, Will t please your Lordship cool your hands? Someone be ready with a costly suit And ask him what apparel he will wear. Another tell him of his hounds and horse, And that his lady mourns at his disease. Persuade him that he hath been lunatic, And when he says he is, say that he dreams, For he is nothing but a mighty lord. This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs. It will be pastime passing excellent If it be husbanded with modesty.
My lord, I promise we will play our parts so skillfully that he will believe everything we tell him.	My lord, I warrant you we will play our part As he shall think by our true diligence He is no less than what we say he is.
Carry him gently to bed, and every man be ready at his post when he awakes.	Take him up gently, and to bed with him, And each one to his office when he wakes.
	
	Traveling some journey, to repose him here.
	
Sir, its a troupe of actors who want to perform for your Lordship.	Ant please your Honor, players That offer service to your Lordship.
Have them come in.	Bid them come near.
	
We thank your Honor.	We thank your Honor.
Were you thinking of spending the night here?	Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
Yes, if that would be all right with your Lordship.	So please your Lordship to accept our duty.
By all means. I remember this fellowhe once played the eldest son of a farmer. It was the play in which you wooed the gentlewoman so successfully. I have forgotten your name, but you were well cast in the role and played it convincingly.	With all my heart. This fellow I remember Since once he played a farmers eldest son. 'Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well. I have forgot your name, but sure that part Was aptly fitted and naturally performed.
I believe your Honor is thinking of a character called Soto.	I think twas Soto that your Honor means.
Yes, that was it. You gave an excellent performance. Well, this is very fortunate, your arriving just at this moment. I happen to be planning a little entertainment and could really use your services. There is a particular lord who will watch you perform tonight. Im a little worried, thoughbecause his Honor has never seen a play beforethat his odd behavior may strike you as funny. You might not be able to control your laughter and you might offend him. I warn you, hes sensitive. The slightest smile provokes him.	'Tis very true. Thou didst it excellent. Well, you are come to me in happy time, The rather for I have some sport in hand Wherein your cunning can assist me much. There is a lord will hear you play tonight; But I am doubtful of your modesties, Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior For yet his Honor never heard a play You break into some merry passion And so offend him. For I tell you, sirs, If you should smile, he grows impatient.
Dont worry. Well restrain ourselvesno matter how bizarrely he behaves.	Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves Were he the veriest antic in the world.
Go, lad, and take them to the pantry. Make them feel welcome and see to it that they have everything they require.	Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery And give them friendly welcome every one. Let them want nothing that my house affords.
	And see him dressed in all suits like a lady. That done, conduct him to the drunkards chamber And call him madam, do him obeisance. Tell him from me, as he will win my love, He bear himself with honorable action, Such as he hath observed in noble ladies Unto their lords, by them accomplishd.
	With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy, And say, What is t your Honor will command, Wherein your lady and your humble wife May show her duty and make known her love? And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses, And with declining head into his bosom, Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed To see her noble lord restored to health, Who for this seven years hath esteemed him No better than a poor and loathsome beggar. And if the boy have not a womans gift To rain a shower of commanded tears, An onion will do well for such a shift, Which in a napkin being close conveyed Shall in despite enforce a watery eye. See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst: Anon Ill give thee more instructions.
	Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman. I long to hear him call the drunkard husband, And how my men will stay themselves from laughter When they do homage to this simple peasant. Ill in to counsel them. Haply my presence May well abate the over-merry spleen Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
For Gods sake, would someone bring me a mug of beer!	For Gods sake, a pot of small ale.
Wouldnt your Lordship prefer some imported wine?	Will t please your Lordship drink a cup of sack?
Would your Honor like to try this dried fruit?	Will t please your Honor taste of these conserves?
What garment would your Honor like to wear today?	What raiment will your Honor wear today?
Im Christopher Sly. Dont call me your Honor and your Lordship. Ive never had imported wine in my life, and if you want to bring me something dried, try beef jerky. Why ask me what garment Ill wear? I have no more jackets than I have backs, no more leggings than I have legs, and no more shoes than I have feetin fact, sometimes I have fewer shoes than feet, as Im not sure the ones where my toes stick out can be called shoes.	I am Christophero Sly. Call not me Honor nor Lordship. I ne'er drank sack in my life. An if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef. Ne'er ask me what raiment Ill wear, for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more shoes than feet, nay sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.
May Heaven put an end to this foolish fantasy of your Honors! How terrible that a man of your influence and noble family, with so much wealth and an excellent reputation, should be infected with such a horrible illness!	Heaven cease this idle humor in your Honor! Oh, that a mighty man of such descent, Of such possessions and so high esteem, Should be infusd with so foul a spirit!
Well, Tranio, here we are in fertile Lombardy, garden of Italy, about to fulfill my lifelong dream. You know how Ive always longed to see the fair city of Padua, famous for its arts and letters, and now, thanks to my fathers generosity, here I amwith his blessing and your good company. So, my trusty servantand youve never let me downwhy dont we settle here for a time to institute a course of study, a really rigorous curriculum. I was born in Pisa, famous for its serious citizens, like my father before me; my father, Vincentio, a successful, world-traveled merchant, was one of the BentivoliiThe Bentivolis were one of the leading families of Bologna, wielding great political power and influence.Bentivolii. Its only fitting that I, his son, reared in Florence, should concentrate on adding more virtuous deeds to my fathers own, stacking them on top of his wealth. For this reason, Tranio, Ill study ethics andfor the time being, anywaypursue those areas of philosophyLucentio is referring to the philosophy of Aristotle.philosophy that teach a man how to achieve happiness through virtue. What do you think of all this? Leaving Pisa for Padua, I feelLucentio means he is overwhelmed.I feel a little like a thirsty man who turns from a puddle to a vast lake he can drink from.	Tranio, since for the great desire I had To see fair Padua, nursery of arts, I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy, The pleasant garden of great Italy, And by my fathers love and leave am armed With his goodwill and thy good company. My trusty servant, well approved in all, Here let us breathe and haply institute A course of learning and ingenious studies. Pisa, renownd for grave citizens, Gave me my being and my father first, A merchant of great traffic through the world, Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii. Vincentios son, brought up in Florence, It shall become to serve all hopes conceived To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds. And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study Virtue, and that part of philosophy Will I apply that treats of happiness By virtue specially to be achieved. Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left And am to Padua come, as he that leaves A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
Farewell, Verona! Im off to visit my friends in Paduaparticularly my best friend Hortensio. And I think this is his house. Here, you there, Grumio. Knock.	Verona, for a while I take my leave, To see my friends in Padua, but of all My best belovd and approvd friend, Hortensio. And I trow this is his house. Here, sirrah Grumio. Knock, I say.
Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Has anyone offended your Worship?	Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebused your Worship?
Moron! Im telling you to make a fist and pound.	Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
Really, sir, I hardly think it would be appropriate for me to poundGrumio acts as if Petruchio asked Grumio to hit him.pound you.	Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir?
Moron, here we are at the gate. Now put your fists to work, or Ill put mine to work on your head!	Villain, I say, knock me at this gate And rap me well, or Ill knock your knaves pate.
My master is being difficult. If I do as he asks I think I know which one of us will be sorrierand its not going to be him!	My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first, And then I know after who comes by the worst.
What are you standing there for! If you wont knock, Ill ringand youll be singing along in falsetto!	Will it not be? Faith, sirrah, an youll not knock, Ill ring it. Ill try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.
(to the unseen mistress or master of the house) Help, mistress, help! My master has gone mad.	Help, mistress, help! My master is mad.
Dear sister, its unfair to meand unfair to yourselfto turn me into a slave. That I wont stand for. But if you want my thingsuntie my hands and Ill give them to you myself, everything, even down to my slip. Or anything else you order me to do. I know I should obey my elders.	Good sister, wrong me not nor wrong yourself, To make a bondmaid and a slave of me. That I disdain. But for these other goods Unbind my hands, Ill pull them off myself, Yea, all my raiment to my petticoat, Or what you will command me will I do, So well I know my duty to my elders.
What I want is for you to tell me which of your suitors you like best. And dont lie.	Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell Whom thou lovest best. See thou dissemble not.
I swear, dear sister, I have not yet encountered that special face I might prefer to any other.	Believe me, sister, of all the men alive I never yet beheld that special face Which I could fancy more than any other.
You lying brat. Its Hortensio, isnt it?	Minion, thou liest. Is t not Hortensio?
If you want him, dear sister, hes yours. I swear Ill woo him for you myself.	If you affect him, sister, here I swear Ill plead for you myself, but you shall have him.
Oh, I see. Youre more interested in money. Youll live in luxury with Gremio.	Oh, then belike you fancy riches more. You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Is it because of him that you envy me? You must be kidding! And now I see that youve been joking all the while. Please, Kate, untie my hands.	Is it for him you do envy me so? Nay, then you jest, and now I well perceive You have but jested with me all this while. I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
(speaking as CAMBIO) Restrain yourself, fiddler! Youre too insistent. Have you forgotten how her sister Katherine thanked you for your lessons?	(as CAMBIO) Fiddler, forbear. You grow too forward, sir. Have you so soon forgot the entertainment Her sister Katherina welcomed you withal?
(speaking as LITIO) Quarrelsome teacher! This lady is the queen of heavenly harmony. Therefore allow me to claim her attention first, and after we have spent an hour on music you can have equal time for your lecture.	(as LITIO) But, wrangling pedant, this is The patroness of heavenly harmony. Then give me leave to have prerogative, And when in music we have spent an hour, Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
(as CAMBIO) Ridiculous ass! Youre not even educated enough to know why music was created. Wasnt it to refresh the mind of man after his studies and daily toil? Therefore allow me to read philosophy with her, and then, when I am finished, indulge in your harmony.	(as CAMBIO) Preposterous ass, that never read so far To know the cause why music was ordained. Was it not to refresh the mind of man After his studies or his usual pain? Then give me leave to read philosophy And, while I pause, serve in your harmony.
(as LITIO) Sir, you go too far! I will not stand for it!	(as LITIO) Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Gentlemen, it seems to me youre both out of line to be laying down the law about things that are really up to me. I am no schoolboy, and I wont be dictated to with hours and schedules. Ill have my lessons in the order and manner I prefer. So to cut short this argument, lets figure this out.	Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong To strive for that which resteth in my choice. I am no breeching scholar in the schools. Ill not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times But learn my lessons as I please myself. And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down.
(to TRANIO as LUCENTIO) Signior Lucentio, this is the day appointed for Katherine and Petruchios wedding, but theres no sign of the groom. What will people say? To have the priest right here, ready to perform the marriage ceremony, and be missing a bridegroom! What do you think about our humiliation, Lucentio?	(to TRANIO) Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day That Katherine and Petruchio should be married, And yet we hear not of our son-in-law. What will be said? What mockery will it be, To want the bridegroom when the priest attends To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage? What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
The humiliation is all mine. You forced me to accept this man against my will, this fancy con artist who was in such a hurry to get engaged. He has no intention of marrying me. I knew itI told you. The whole thing was a joke. He pretends to be this simple, backward guy, but its all a gag to amuse his witty friends. He goes around proposing to womenthey set a date, he gets introduced around, they send out the invitations and make a public announcement, but he has no intention of going through with it. So now everyone will point at me and say, Look, there goes the wife of that comedian Petruchioif he could be bothered to marry the pathetic thing!	No shame but mine. I must, forsooth, be forced To give my hand, opposed against my heart, Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen, Who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure. I told you, I, he was a frantic fool, Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior, And, to be noted for a merry man, Hell woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage, Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns, Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed. Now must the world point at poor Katherine And say, Lo, there is mad Petruchios wife, If it would please him come and marry her!
(speaking as LUCENTIO) No, no, I assure you, Katherineand you, too, BaptistaPetruchio means well, whatever circumstance prevents him from keeping his word. Hes rough-edged, but hes a good man, and though he likes a joke, hes not a liar.	(as LUCENTIO) Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too. Upon my life, Petruchio means but well, Whatever fortune stays him from his word: Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise; Though he be merry, yet withal hes honest.
To hell with all worn-out horses, all crazy masters, and all bad roads. Was a man ever beaten as much as me? Was a man ever as dirty as me? Was a man ever so tired? I have been sent on ahead to light a fire, and they are coming after to warm themselves. Its a good thing Im like a little pot and warm up quickly, or else my lips themselves would freeze and stick to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, and my heart would freeze in my belly, before I managed to get thawed out. Ill warm myself by blowing on the fire. A taller man than I would catch cold in weather like this. Hey! Curtis! Hello!	Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so 'rayed? Was ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself. For, considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold.Holla, ho! Curtis!
Who calls so coldly?	Who is that calls so coldly?
A piece of ice. Trust me, you could slide all the way from my shoulder to my heel taking no more of a running start than the distance between my head and my neck. Start the fire, good Curtis.	A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire, good Curtis.
Are my master and his wife coming, Grumio?	Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
Yes, yes, Curtis, so hurry up and start the fire. Leave out the water.	Oh, ay, Curtis, ay, and therefore fire, fire. Cast on no water.
Is she as fiery a shrew as they say?	Is she so hot a shrew as shes reported?
(as LUCENTIO) I dont believe it, Litio. Its not possible that Bianca could prefer another man to me. Ive seen the way she behaves.	(as LUCENTIO) Is t possible, friend Litio, that mistress Bianca Doth fancy any other but Lucentio? I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
(as LITIO) You want proof of what Im telling you? Stand right here and watch this fellows lesson. (they stand off to one side)	(as LITIO) Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said, Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching. They stand aside
(as CAMBIO) Well, mistress, are you learning from what youre reading?	(as CAMBIO) Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
What are you reading, teacher? Answer me that first.	What, master, read you? First resolve me that.
(as CAMBIO) Im reading the book I know best The Art of LoveOvid the Art of Love was a manual of seduction.The Art of Love	(as CAMBIO) I read that I profess, The Art to Love.
I hope youre an expert in your field.	And may you prove, sir, master of your art.
(as CAMBIO) Well, my dear, youre the mistress of my heart in any case!	(as CAMBIO) While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
(as LITIO) Quick work for schoolwork! How do you explain that? I though you said your precious Bianca loved no one better than you, Lucentio!	(as LITIO) Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray, You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.
(as LUCENTIO) Oh spiteful love! Faithless womanhood! Its incredible, Litio!	(as LUCENTIO) O despiteful love! Unconstant womankind! I tell thee, Litio, this is wonderful!
No, no, I cant, really. Hed kill me.	No, no, forsooth, I dare not for my life.
The more I suffer, the more spiteful he becomes. Did he marry me just to starve me? Beggars at my fathers door are given money as soon as they ask for it. And if they dont find charity there, they find it someplace else. But I, who have never known how to beg and never had to beg, am starved for food, dizzy with lack of sleep, kept awake with curses and fed with brawling. And what irks me more than all these things put together is that he does it under the pretense of loveas though for me to eat or sleep would bring on fatal illness or sudden death. Please, go and get me something to eat. I dont care what so long as its nutritious.	The more my wrong, the more his spite appears. What, did he marry me to famish me? Beggars that come unto my fathers door Upon entreaty have a present alms. If not, elsewhere they meet with charity. But I, who never knew how to entreat, Nor never needed that I should entreat, Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep, With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed. And that which spites me more than all these wants, He does it under name of perfect love, As who should say, if I should sleep or eat, 'Twere deadly sickness or else present death. I prithee, go and get me some repast, I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
What do you say to a calfs foot?	What say you to a neats foot?
Oh, lovely. Can I have some?	'Tis passing good. I prithee let me have it.
Im afraid it will raise your blood pressureCholeric = angryraise your blood pressure. What do you say to an ox stomach, nicely broiled?	I fear it is too choleric a meat. How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?
Id love it. Nice Grumio, bring me some.	I like it well. Good Grumio, fetch it me.
I dont know. Im afraid it will make you too hot, too. What do you say to a piece of beef with mustard?	I cannot tell. I fear tis choleric. What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
A favorite dish of mine.	A dish that I do love to feed upon.
(as LUCENTIO) Sir, this is the house. Would you like me to ring?	(as LUCENTIO) Sir, this is the house. Please it you that I call?
Yes, certainly. Unless I am mistaken, Signior Baptista may remember me from the Pegasus in Genoa, where we both stayed twenty years ago.	Ay, what else? and but I be deceived, Signior Baptista may remember me, Near twenty years ago, in Genoa, Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
(as LUCENTIO) Fine, fine. Just play your part and act as serious as a father should.	(as LUCENTIO) 'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case, With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
Of course I will.	I warrant you.
	'Twere good he were schooled.
(as LUCENTIO) Dont worry about him.You there, Biondello, now act your part convincingly. Behave as though this were the real Vincentio.	(as LUCENTIO) Fear you not him.Sirrah Biondello, Now do your duty throughly, I advise you. Imagine twere the right Vincentio.
Dont worry about me.	Tut, fear not me.
(as LUCENTIO) And did you take the message to Baptista?	(as LUCENTIO) But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
I told him that your father was in Venice, and that you expected him to arrive in Padua today.	I told him that your father was at Venice, And that you looked for him this day in Padua.
Come, lets continue on toward your fathers house. Good Lord, how bright and splendid is the moon tonight!	Come on, i' Gods name, once more toward our fathers. Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
The moon? You mean the sun! It is not nighttime now.	The moon? The sun! It is not moonlight now.
I say its the moon that shines so bright.	I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
I know its the sun that shines so bright.	I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
Now, by my mothers son, and thats me, it will be moon or star or whatever I want before Ill travel to your fathers house. (to servants) Go return our horses. Constantly contradicted and contradicted, and nothing but contradicted!	Now, by my mothers son, and thats myself, It shall be moon, or star, or what I list, Or e'er I journey to your fathers house. (to servants) Go on, and fetch our horses back again. Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed!
(to KATHERINE) Say what he wants or well never go.	(to KATHERINE) Say as he says, or we shall never go.
Since weve come this far, pleaselets continue on. And whatever it ismoon or sun or anything you likeif you want to call it a tea candle, thats what it is as far as Im concerned. From now on, I promise.	Forward, I pray, since we have come so far, And be it moon, or sun, or what you please. An if you please to call it a rush candle, Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
I say its the moon.	I say it is the moon.
I know its the moon.	I know it is the moon.
Well, youre a liar, then. Its the blessed sun.	Nay, then you lie. It is the blessd sun.
Quickly and quietly, sir. The priest is already there.	Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
Were off, Biondello. But they may need you at home, so you go on back.	I fly, Biondello. But they may chance to need thee at home. Therefore leave us.
Ill see them safely married first and then hurry back to my masters.	Nay, faith, Ill see the church a' your back, and then come back to my masters as soon as I can.
I wonder why Cambio hasnt shown up in all this time.	I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
Here is the door, sir. This is Lucentios house. My father-in-law lives closer to the marketplace. Thats where Im going now, so Ill leave you here.	Sir, heres the door. This is Lucentios house. My fathers bears more toward the marketplace. Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
You must not go without having a drink first. I think I may presume to welcome you, and theyre probably preparing some kind of feast to welcome me.	You shall not choose but drink before you go. I think I shall command your welcome here, And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.
Theyre pretty busy in there. Youd better knock louder.	Theyre busy within. You were best knock louder.
Finally, at long last, weve reconciled our differences. Now is the timewhen war is safely overto laugh at past dangers and adventures. My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome, while I with equal affection welcome yours. Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina, and you, Hortensio, with your loving widow, youll find no better entertainment anywhere. All of you are welcome in my house. This last course here is for closing up the stomach after great feasting. Now everyone be seated, as this is the part where we sit and chat as well as eat.	At last, though long, our jarring notes agree, And time it is when raging war is done To smile at scapes and perils overblown. My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome, While I with selfsame kindness welcome thine. Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina, And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow, Feast with the best, and welcome to my house. My banquet is to close our stomachs up, After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down, For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
All we do is sit and sit and eat and eat.	Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Yes, Padua is famous for this pleasant life, Petruchio, my son.	Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Padua contains nothing that isnt pleasant.	Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
I wish that were true for both our sakes!	For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
Well what do you know! Hortensio fearsFears here can mean bothis afraid of, which is how Petruchio means it, and frightens, which is how the widow takes it.fears his widow. 	Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow. 
Boatswain!	Boatswain!
Im here, sir. How can I help you?	Here, master. What cheer?
My good boy, give the other sailors a pep talkand do it fast, before were shipwrecked. Hurry, hurry!	Good, speak to th' mariners. Fall to t yarely, or we run ourselves aground. Bestir, bestir.
Come on, men! Thats the way to do it! Quickly! Quickly! Take in the upper sail. Listen to the masters orders. Blow your heart out, storm! So long as we have enough room to avoid running aground!	Heigh, my hearts! Cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! Yare! Yare! Take in the topsail.Tend to th' masters whistle.Blow, till thou burst thy wind, if room enough!
Be careful, good Boatswain! Wheres the Master? Make these men work.	Good Boatswain, have care. Wheres the Master? Play the men.
Please stay below deck, sir.	I pray now, keep below.
Wheres the Master, Boatswain?	Where is the Master, Boatswain?
Hes busy, cant you hear him giving orders? Youre getting in the way of our work. Stay in your cabins. Youre helping the storm, not us.	Do you not hear him? You mar our labor. Keep your cabins. You do assist the storm.
Dont get wound up, my good man.	Nay, good, be patient.
Im only wound up because the seas wound up. Now get out of here! Do you think these waves care anything about kings and officials? Go to your cabins and be quiet! Dont bother us up here.	When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers for the name of king? To cabin, silence! Trouble us not.
Just remember who youve got on board with you, good man.	Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
Nobody I care about more than myself. Youre a kings advisor. If you can order the storm to calm down, we can all put down our ropes and rest. Go ahead, use your authority. If you cant do it, be grateful youve lived this long and go wait to die in your cabin, if it comes to that.Harder, men!Now get out of our way, Im telling you.	None that I more love than myself. You are a councilor. If you can command these elements to silence and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more. Use your authority. If you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.Cheerly, good hearts!Out of our way, I say.
I feel a lot better after talking to this guy. He doesnt look like a person who would drownhe looks like he was born to be hangedGonzalo implies that the Boatswain looks and acts like a dangerous criminal.hanged. I hope he lives long enough to be hanged. The rope that hangs him will do more good than all the ropes on this ship, since itll guarantee he stays alive through this storm. But if hes not destined to die by hanging, then our chances dont look too good.	I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him. His complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging. Make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage. If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.
Bring down that top sail! Fast! Lower, lower! Let the ship sail close to the wind.	Down with the topmast! Yare, lower, lower! Bring her to try wi' th' main course.
	
	Have you a mind to sink?
Oh, go to hell, you loud-mouthed bastard!	A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!
Well, get to work, then.	Work you, then.
Just die, you lowlife! Go ahead and die, you nasty, rude bastard!Youre more scared of drowning than we are.	Hang, cur! Hang, you whoreson insolent noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.
Yes, I guarantee he wont drowneven if this ship were as fragile as an eggshell and as leaky as a menstruating woman.	Ill warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.
Turn the ship to the wind! Set the sails and let her go out to sea again!	Lay her a-hold, a-hold! Set her two courses off to sea again. Lay her off!
Its no use! Pray for your lives! Were done for!	All lost! To prayers, to prayers, all lost!
What, were going to die?	What, must our mouths be cold?
The king and the prince are praying. Lets go join them, since whatever happens to them happens to us too.	The king and prince at prayers. Lets assist them, for our case is as theirs.
Im out of patience.	Im out of patience.
Yes, weve been cheated out of our lives by a bunch of drunken, incompetent sailors. This bigmouth jerk here(to BOATSWAIN) I hope you drown ten times over!	We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards. This wide-chopped rascalwould thou mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!
Hell still die by hanging, not drowning, even if every drop of water in the sea tries to swallow him.	Hell be hanged yet, though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him.
God have mercy on us!The ships breaking up!Goodbye, wife and kids!Goodbye, brother!Were breaking up, were breaking up!	(within) Mercy on us!We split, we split!Farewell, my wife and children!Farewell, brother!We split, we split, we split!
Lets all sink with the king.	Lets all sink wi' th' king.
Lets say goodbye to him.	Lets take leave of him.
Right now Id give a thousand furlongs1 furlong = 220 yardsfurlongs of sea for one little acre of dry ground: barren weed patch, anything at all. Whats destined to happen will happen, but Id give anything to be dry when I die.	Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground: long heath, brown furze, anything. The wills above be done, but I would fain die a dry death.
Dear father, if you caused this terrible storm with your magic powers, please put an end to it. The skys so dark it looks like it would rain down boiling hot tar if the sea werent swelling up to the sky to put its fire out. Oh, I suffered along with all the men I watched suffer! A fine ship, with some good people in it, Im sure, smashed to pieces. Their dying shouts broke my heart! The poor people died. If Id been a god I wouldve let the sea sink inside the earth before it had a chance to swallow up that ship and all the people it was carrying.	If by your art, my dearest father, you have Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them. The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch, But that the sea, mounting to th' welkins cheek, Dashes the fire out. Oh, I have suffered With those that I saw suffer. A brave vessel Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her Dashed all to pieces. Oh, the cry did knock Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perished. Had I been any god of power, I would Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere It should the good ship so have swallowed and The fraughting souls within her.
Calm down. Theres nothing to get upset about. No harm was done.	Be collected. No more amazement. Tell your piteous heart Theres no harm done.
Oh, what a horrible day!	Oh, woe the day!
There was no harm, Im telling you. Everything Ive done has been for you, my dear daughter. You dont know what you are, since you dont know who I am or where I come from, or that Im better than merely Prospero, your humble father who lives in a poor little shack.	No harm. I have done nothing but in care of thee, Of thee, my dear onethee my daughter, who Art ignorant of what thou art, naught knowing Of whence I am, nor that I am more better Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell And thy no greater father.
It never occurred to me to imagine there was anything more to know.	More to know Did never meddle with my thoughts.
(to ALONSO) Please cheer up, sir. Like all of us, you have a good reason to be happy. The fact that were alive outweighs our losses. Many people every day feel the sadness we feel now. Every day some sailors wife, a ships crew, the merchant who hired the ship all experience the same loss weve undergone. But the miraclethe fact that we were savedonly happens to a few people out of millions. So remember that, and take comfort in it, to counterbalance our sadness.	(to ALONSO) Beseech you, sir, be merry. You have cause, So have we all, of joy, for our escape Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe Is common. Every day some sailors wife, The masters of some merchant, and the merchant Have just our theme of woe. But for the miracle I mean our preservationfew in millions Can speak like us. Then wisely, good sir, weigh Our sorrow with our comfort.
Please say no more.	Prithee, peace.
(to ANTONIO) Alonso enjoys these comforting words about as much as cold oatmeal.	(to ANTONIO) He receives comfort like cold porridge.
(to SEBASTIAN) But the goodwill ambassador wont give up that easily.	(to SEBASTIAN) The visitor will not give him o'er so.
(to ANTONIO) Look. Hes like a clock winding up to strike the hour.	Look hes winding up the watch of his wit. By and by it will strike.
(to ALONSO) Sir	(to ALONSO) Sir
(to ANTONIO) There he goes! Now we can tell what time it is.	(to ANTONIO) One. Tell.
If we let every sad thing that happens to us get us down, then we would find ourselves	When every grief is entertained thats offered, Comes to th' entertainer
I hope all the diseases that breed in swamps and marshes infect Prospero, inch by inch, until hes nothing but a walking disease! His spirits are listening to me, but I cant help cursing him anyway. They wont pinch me, frighten me, push me in the mud, or mislead me unless he tells them to. But he sends them to punish me for every little thing. Sometimes his spirits take the form of apes, grimacing and chattering at me and then biting me; sometimes they come like porcupines, my feet as I walk. Sometimes snakes wrap around me, hissing at me with their forked tongues till I go crazy.	All the infections that the sun sucks up From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him By inchmeal a disease! His spirits hear me And yet I needs must curse. But theyll nor pinch, Fright me with urchin-shows, pitch me i' th' mire, Nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark Out of my way, unless he bid 'em. But For every trifle are they set upon me, Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me, And after bite me, then like hedgehogs which Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount Their pricks at my footfall. Sometime am I All wound with adders who with cloven tongues Do hiss me into madness.
	Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me For bringing wood in slowly. Ill fall flat. Perchance he will not mind me. (lies down, covered by his gaberdine)
There are no bushes or shrubs to protect me from the weather here. And theres another storm brewingI can hear it in the way the wind whistles. That huge black cloud over there looks like a filthy liquor jug thats about to pour out its contents. It wont be able to help pouring rain down by the bucket-full. (he sees CALIBAN)	Heres neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all. And another storm brewing, I hear it sing i' th' wind. Yond same black cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor. If it should thunder as it did before, I know not where to hide my head. Yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls. (sees CALIBAN)
Some games are painful, but their discomfort makes them more fun. Some kinds of lowly activities are done for noble reasons. And you can do poor things that lead to rich results. This hard work would be boring and nasty to me, but Im working for a mistress who makes me enjoy my labor. Oh, shes ten times nicer than her father is mean, and hes the height of crabbiness. I have thousands of logs to take away and pile up, on strict orders from him. My sweet darling cries when she sees me work and tells me that such a wonderful man never performed such lowly tasks before. These sweet thoughts relieve me and refresh me, especially when Im slaving away busily.	There be some sports are painful, and their labor Delight in them sets off. Some kinds of baseness Are nobly undergone. And most poor matters Point to rich ends. This my mean task Would be as heavy to me as odious, but The mistress which I serve quickens whats dead And makes my labors pleasures. Oh, she is Ten times more gentle than her fathers crabbed, And hes composed of harshness. I must remove Some thousands of these logs and pile them up, Upon a sore injunction. My sweet mistress Weeps when she sees me work, and says such baseness Had never like executor. I forget, But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors, Most busiest when I do it.
Now, please, I beg you, dont work so hard. I wish the lightning had burned up all those logs that youve been ordered to stack! Please put that log down and rest a while. When this wood burns, itll weep for making you tired. My fathers studying hard, so he wont see you. So please rest. Were safe from my father for at least three hours.	Alas now, pray you, Work not so hard. I would the lightning had Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile! Pray, set it down and rest you. When this burns, 'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father Is hard at study. Pray now, rest yourself. Hes safe for these three hours.
Dont tell me that. When the barrels empty, well drink water. Not one drop sooner. Therefore, drink up.Servant-monster, drink a toast to me.	Tell not me. When the butt is out, we will drink water. Nota drop before. Therefore bear up and board 'em.Servant-monster, drink to me.
Servant monster? What a crazy island this is. They say there are only five people on it. Were three of them. If the other two are as loopy as we are, our countrys in bad shape.	Servant-monster? The folly of this island. They saytheres but five upon this isle. We are three of them. If th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.
Drink when I order you, servant-monster. Your eyes look like theyve sunk into your head.	Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee. Thy eyes arealmost set in thy head.
Where else should his eyes be, if not in his head? Hed be quite a monster if his eyes were in his tail.	Where should they be set else? He were a brave monsterindeed, if they were set in his tail.
My manmonster is so drunk he cant talk. As for me, no liquid can harm me, neither booze nor the whole sea itself. Before I could get to shore, I swam thirty-five leagues1 league = 3 milesleagues in it and still survived.Monster, youll be my lieutenant, or my flag-bearer.	My man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack. For mypart, the sea cannot drown me. I swam, ere I could recoverthe shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. By this light,thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.
Lieutenant is better. Hes not standing straight enough to hold a flag.	Your lieutenant, if you list. Hes no standard.
Were not going to run in our army, Monsieur Monster.	Well not run, Monsieur Monster.
Or walk either. Youll just lie there like sleeping dogs and say nothing.	Nor go neither. But youll lie like dogs, and yet say nothingneither.
I swear, I cant go any further, sir. My old bones are tired. Were wandering in a maze. If you dont mind, I need to rest a bit.	(to ALONSO) By 'r lakin, I can go no further, sir. My old bones ache. Heres a maze trod indeed Through forthrights and meanders. By your patience, I needs must rest me.
I cant blame you, old lord. Im so tired myself that its bringing me down. Sit down and rest. Im losing hope. The one were looking for is dead. Were searching on land, but hes lost in the sea. We have to give up and let him go.	Old lord, I cannot blame thee, Who am myself attached with weariness To th' dulling of my spirits. Sit down and rest. Even here I will put off my hope and keep it No longer for my flatterer. He is drowned Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.
(speaking so that only SEBASTIAN can hear) Im glad hes so depressed. Dont back out of our plan just because it didnt work the first time.	(aside to SEBASTIAN) I am right glad that hes so out of hope. Do not for one repulse forego the purpose That you resolved t' effect.
(speaking so that only ANTONIO can hear) The next chance we get, well do the deed.	(aside to ANTONIO)The next advantage Will we take throughly.
(speaking so that only SEBASTIAN can hear) Lets do it tonight. The men are so tired from traveling that they cant be as careful as they are when theyre fresh.	(aside to SEBASTIAN)Let it be tonight, For now they are oppressed with travel. They Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance As when they are fresh.
(to FERDINAND) If Ive punished you too harshly, Im ready to make it up to you now, since Ive given you a third of my lifeeverything I live formy daughter Miranda. I put her in your hands. All the trouble I put you through was to test your love for her, and youve passed the test remarkably well. As heaven is my witness, I give you this valuable gift. Oh Ferdinand, dont smile at me for bragging about Miranda, for youll see soon enough that she outshines any praise of her.	(to FERDINAND) If I have too austerely punished you, Your compensation makes amends, for I Have given you here a third of mine own life Or that for which I livewho once again I tender to thy hand. All thy vexations Were but my trials of thy love and thou Hast strangely stood the test. Here, afore heaven, I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand, Do not smile at me that I boast of her, For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise And make it halt behind her.
Id believe it even if oraclesAn oracle is someone who delivers messages from the gods.oracles told me differently.	 I do believe it Against an oracle.
Then take my daughter, both as my gift to you and as something you have earned. But if you have sex with her before the marriage ceremony takes place, the heavens will not bless your relationship, but will overwhelm you with hate, contempt, and discord, and will poison your marriage bed so that you both grow to loathe it. So be careful, and make sure you respect the holy institution of marriage.	Then as my gift and thine own acquisition Worthily purchased, take my daughter. But If thou dost break her virgin knot before All sanctimonious ceremonies may With full and holy rite be ministered, No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall To make this contract grow, but barren hate, Sour-eyed disdain, and discord shall bestrew The union of your bed with weeds so loathly That you shall hate it both. Therefore take heed, As Hymens lamps shall light you.
My plans are almost at their climax. My spells are working well, my spirits are obeying me, and everything is right on schedule. What time is it?	Now does my project gather to a head. My charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time Goes upright with his carriage. Hows the day?
Its after six o'clock, my lord, when you said our work would be finished.	On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord, You said our work should cease.
Thats what I said when I first conjured the tempest. Tell me, spirit, hows the king and his entourage?	I did say so When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit, How fares the king and s followers?
All cooped up together, just as you ordered, all imprisoned in the grove of linden trees that protects your room from bad weather. They cant move till you release them. The king, his brother, and your brother are all waiting there in a crazed state of mind, and the rest are grieving over them, sad and astonished. Good old lord Gonzalo, as you call him, is saddest of all, with tears running down his beard. Your magic spell has such an effect on them that if you saw them now, youd feel sorry for them.	Confined together In the same fashion as you gave in charge, Just as you left them, all prisoners, sir, In the line grove which weather-fends your cell. They cannot budge till your release. The king, His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted, And the remainder mourning over them, Brimful of sorrow and dismay. But chiefly Him that you termed, sir, the good old Lord Gonzalo, His tears run down his beard like winters drops From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works 'em That if you now beheld them, your affections Would become tender.
Do you think so, spirit?	Dost thou think so, spirit?
Id feel sorry for them, if I were human.	Mine would, sir, were I human.
Now my spells are all broken, And the only power I have is my own, Which is very weak. Now you all Have got the power to keep me prisoner here, Or send me off to Naples. Please dont Keep me here on this desert island With your magic spells. Release me So I can return to my dukedom With your help. The gentle wind You blow with your applause Will fill my ships sails. Without applause, My plan to please you has failed. Now I have no spirits to enslave, No magic to cast spells, And Ill end up in despair Unless Im relieved by prayer, Which wins over God himself And absolves all sins. Just as youd like to have your sins forgiven, Indulge me, forgive me, and set me free. 	Now my charms are all o'erthrown, And what strength I haves mine own, Which is most faint. Now, tis true, I must be here confined by you, Or sent to Naples. Let me not, Since I have my dukedom got And pardoned the deceiver, dwell In this bare island by your spell, But release me from my bands With the help of your good hands. Gentle breath of yours my sails Must fill, or else my project fails, Which was to please. Now I want Spirits to enforce, art to enchant, And my ending is despair, Unless I be relieved by prayer, Which pierces so that it assaults Mercy itself and frees all faults. As you from crimes would pardoned be, Let your indulgence set me free. 
If its true that music makes people more in love, keep playing. Give me too much of it, so Ill get sick of it and stop loving. Play that part again! It sounded sad. Oh, it sounded like a sweet breeze blowing gently over a bank of violets, taking their scent with it. Thats enough. Stop. It doesnt sound as sweet as it did before. Oh, love is so restless! It makes you want everything, but it makes you sick of things a minute later, no matter how good they are. Love is so vivid and fantastical that nothing compares to it.	If music be the food of love, play on. Give me excess of it that, surfeiting, The appetite may sicken, and so die. That strain again, it had a dying fall. Oh, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound, That breathes upon a bank of violets, Stealing and giving odor. Enough, no more. 'Tis not so sweet now as it was before. O spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou, That, notwithstanding thy capacity Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there, Of what validity and pitch soe'er, But falls into abatement and low price Even in a minute. So full of shapes is fancy That it alone is high fantastical.
Do you want to go hunting, my lord?	Will you go hunt, my lord?
Hunting what, Curio?	What, Curio?
The harthart = male deerhart.	The hart.
Thats what Im doingonly its my heart thats being hunted. Oh, when I first saw Olivia, it seemed like she made the air around her sweeter and purer. In that instant I was transformed into a hart, and my desire for her has hounded me like a pack of vicious dogs.	Why, so I do, the noblest that I have. Oh, when mine eyes did see Olivia first, Methought she purged the air of pestilence. That instant was I turned into a hart, And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds, E'er since pursue me.
	
Im sorry, but they wouldnt let me in. But I got the following answer from her handmaid. Olivias not going to show her face for the next seven yearsnot even to the sky itself. Instead, shell go around veiled like a nun, and once a day shell water her room with tears. Shes doing this out of love for her dead brother, whom she wants to keep fresh in her memory forever.	So please my lord, I might not be admitted, But from her handmaid do return this answer: The element itself, till seven years' heat, Shall not behold her face at ample view, But like a cloistress, she will veiled walk And water once a day her chamber round With eye-offending brineall this to season A brothers dead love, which she would keep fresh And lasting in her sad remembrance.
Oh, if she loves her brother this much, think how shell love me when I finally win her over and make her forget all her other attachments! Her mind and heart will be ruled by one man aloneme! Take me to the garden. I need a beautiful place to sit and think about love.	O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame To pay this debt of love but to a brother, How will she love, when the rich golden shaft Hath killed the flock of all affections else That live in her, when liver, brain, and heart, These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filled Her sweet perfections with one self king! Away before me to sweet beds of flowers. Love thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
What country is this, friends?	What country, friends, is this?
This is Illyria, lady.	This is Illyria, lady.
And what am I supposed to do in Illyria? My brother is in heaven. Or maybe theres a chance he didnt drown.What do you think, sailors?	And what should I do in Illyria? My brother he is in Elysium. Perchance he is not drownd.What think you, sailors?
It was a total fluke that you yourself were saved.	It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
Oh, my poor brother! But maybe by some fluke he was saved too.	O, my poor brother! And so perchance may he be.
Its possible, ma'am. Dont give up yet. When our ship was wrecked and you and a few other survivors were clinging onto our lifeboat, I saw your brother tie himself to a big mast floating in the sea. He was acting resourcefully and courageously in a dangerous situation. For as long as I could see him, he stayed afloat on the waves like ArionArion was a Greek poet who was saved from drowning by a dolphin.Arion on the dolphins back.	True, madam. And, to comfort you with chance, Assure yourself, after our ship did split, When you and those poor number saved with you Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother, Most provident in peril, bind himself, Courage and hope both teaching him the practice, To a strong mast that lived upon the sea, Where, like Arion on the dolphins back, I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves So long as I could see.
(giving him money) Thank you for saying thatheres some money to express my gratitude. Since I survived, its easier for me to imagine he survived too, and what you say gives me a reason to hope for the best. Do you know this area were in?	(giving him money) For saying so, theres gold. Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope, Whereto thy speech serves for authority, The like of him. Knowst thou this country?
Yes, ma'am, I know it well. I was born and raised less than three hours from here.	Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and born Not three hours' travel from this very place.
Whats wrong with my niece? Why is she reacting so strangely to her brothers death? Grief is bad for peoples health.	What a plague means my niece, to take the death of herbrother thus? I am sure cares an enemy to life.
For Gods sake, Sir Toby, youve got to come home earlier at night. My lady Olivia, your niece, disapproves of your late-night partying.	By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o' nights.Your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your illhours.
Well, she can get used to it.	Why, let her except, before excepted.
Yes, but you need to keep yourself within the limits of order and decency.	Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limitsof order.
Keep myself? The only thing Im keeping myself in is the clothes Im wearing. Theyre good enough to drink in, and so are these boots. If they arent, they can go hang themselves by their own laces!	Confine? Ill confine myself no finer than I am. Theseclothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these bootstoo. An they be not, let them hang themselves in their ownstraps.
Youre going to destroy yourself with all this drinking. Lady Olivia said so yesterday. She also mentioned some stupid knight you brought in one night as a possible husband for her.	That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard my ladytalk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you broughtin one night here to be her wooer.
Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?	Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
Yes, thats the one.	Ay, he.
Hes as tallTall could be used as slang for brave.tall as a man in Illyria.	Hes as tall a man as any s in Illyria.
If the Duke keeps treating you so well, Cesario, youll go far. Hes only known you for three days, but hes already treating you like a close friend.	If the duke continue these favors towards you, Cesario, youare like to be much advanced. He hath known you but threedays, and already you are no stranger.
When you wonder whether hell keep treating me well, it makes me think his mood might changeor else Ill mess up somehow. Do his feelings toward people change suddenly?	You either fear his humor or my negligence, that you call inquestion the continuance of his love. Is he inconstant, sir, inhis favors?
No, not at all.	No, believe me.
Thanks for telling me. Here comes the Duke now.	I thank you. Here comes the count.
Has anyone seen Cesario?	Who saw Cesario, ho?
Im right here, my lord, at your service.	On your attendance, my lord, here.
(to VIOLA and attendants) Well need some privacy for a little while. (to VIOLA) Cesario, I want a word with you. You know everything about me. Ive told you all the secrets of my soul. So please go to her house; if they dont let you in, plant yourself outside her door and tell them you wont leave until they let you see her.	(to VIOLA and attendants) Stand you a while aloof. (to VIOLA) Cesario, Thou knowst no less but all. I have unclasped To thee the book even of my secret soul. Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her; Be not denied access, stand at her doors, And tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow Till thou have audience.
No. Either tell me where youve been, or I wont make any excuses for you to Lady Olivia. Lady Olivia will have you executed for not showing up.	Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will not openmy lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse.My lady will hang thee for thy absence.
So let her execute me. Anyone whos executed doesnt have to be afraid of anything he sees.	Let her hang me. He that is well hanged in this world needsto fear no colors.
How do you know?	Make that good.
Well, hell be dead, so he wont see anything.	He shall see none to fear.
Thats a lame answer. By the way, I know where you get all your brave talk about not being afraid of anything.	A good lenten answer. I can tell thee where that saying wasborn, of I fear no colors.
Where, good Miss Mary?	Where, good Mistress Mary?
From soldiers. But youll never see the front lines. Its easy for you to talk about bravery, working as a fool in this palace.	In the wars. And that may you be bold to say in yourfoolery.
Well, we all have our special gifts. Some people are born wise; those of us who were meant to be fools should do what they do best.	Well, God give them wisdom that have it. And those thatare fools, let them use their talents.
But still, shes going to kill you for being gone so long. Or at least fire you. And wouldnt that be as bad for you as being killed?	Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent. Or to beturned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?
You wont stay any longer? And you dont want me to come with you?	Will you stay no longer, nor will you not that I go with you?
No, Id rather you stayed here. My luck is pretty bad right now, and it might rub off on you. So just let me say goodbye and face the bad stuff aloneotherwise I wouldnt be thanking you very well for all youve done for me.	By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly over me. Themalignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours.Therefore I shall crave of you your leave that I may bear myevils alone. It were a bad recompense for your love to layany of them on you.
At least tell me where youre going.	Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.
Honestly, I cant. Im just wandering, with no particular destination. But I know youd never force me to tell you things I dont want to, so I should be polite and tell you what I can. My names Sebastian, though Ive been calling myself Roderigo. My father was Sebastian of Messaline. I know youve heard of him. Hes dead now. He left behind myself and my twin sister, who was born in the same hour as me. If God had been willing, I wish we had died in the same hour too! But you kept that from happening. An hour before you pulled me out of the breaking waves, my sister drowned.	No, sooth, sir. My determinate voyage is mereextravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a touch ofmodesty that you will not extort from me what I am willingto keep in. Therefore it charges me in manners the rather toexpress myself. You must know of me then, Antonio, myname is Sebastian, which I called Roderigo. My father wasthat Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heardof. He left behind him myself and a sister, both born in anhour. If the heavens had been pleased, would we had soended! But you, sir, altered that, for some hour before youtook me from the breach of the sea was my sister drowned.
How tragic!	Alas the day!
Excuse me, werent you with Countess Olivia just now?	Were not you even now with the Countess Olivia?
Yes, sir. Ive only made it this far since I left her place, walking at a moderate pace.	Even now, sir. On a moderate pace I have since arrived buthither.
Shes sending this ring back to you, sir. You shouldve saved me some trouble and taken it away yourself. She wants you to make it very clear to your lord that she wants nothing to do with him, and that you should never come again on his behalf, unless you want to come back to tell her how he reacted to the bad news. Here, take the ring.	She returns this ring to you, sir. You might have saved memy pains to have taken it away yourself. She adds,moreover, that you should put your lord into a desperateassurance she will none of him. And one thing more, thatyou be never so hardy to come again in his affairs, unless itbe to report your lords taking of this. Receive it so.
She took that ring from me. I wont take it back.	She took the ring of me. Ill none of it.
You threw it at her rudely, and she wants you to take it back. (he throws down the ring) If its worth bending over to pick up, there it is on the ground, where you can see it. If not, whoever finds it can have it.	Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and her will is itshould be so returned. (he throws down the ring) If it beworth stooping for, there it lies in your eye. If not, be it histhat finds it.
I didnt give her any ring. Whats she trying to say? I hope she doesnt have a crush on me! Its true she looked at me a lot, in fact, she looked at me so much that she seemed distracted, and couldnt really finish her sentences very well. Oh, I really think she loves me! She sent this rude messenger to tell me to come back, instead of coming herself, which would be indis-	I left no ring with her. What means this lady? Fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her! She made good view of me, indeed so much That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue, For she did speak in starts distractedly. She loves me, sure! The cunning of her passion Invites me in this churlish messenger.
Come on, Sir Andrew. If were still awake after midnight, then were up early in the morning. And the doctors say its healthy to get up early	Approach, Sir Andrew. Not to be abed after midnight is tobe up betimes, and diluculo surgere, thou knowst,
I dont know what the doctors say. All I know is that staying up late is staying up late.	Nay, my troth, I know not. But I know to be up late is to beup late.
A false conclusion. I hate your logic as much as I hate an empty drinking cup. Staying up after midnight means that you go to bed after midnight, in the wee hours of the morning, which is early. So its like going to bed early. Isnt everybody made up of the four elementsearth, water, fire, and air?	A false conclusion. I hate it as an unfilled can. To be up aftermidnight and to go to bed then, is early, so that to go to bedafter midnight is to go to bed betimes. Does not our lifeconsist of the four elements?
Thats what they say, but I think life consists of food and booze.	Faith, so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating anddrinking.
Youre a smart guy. So we should eat and drink. Maria! Bring us some wine!	Thou'rt a scholar. Let us therefore eat and drink. Marian, I say! A stoup of wine!
Look, here comes the fool.	Here comes the fool, i' faith.
Hello, my friends! What a pretty picture, three fools all together.	How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture of We Three?
Hello, you idiot. Sing us a song.	Welcome, ass. Now lets have a catch.
Play me some music. (music plays) Good morning, my friends.Have them sing me that song again, Cesario, that old-fashioned song someone sang last night. It made me feel better and took my mind off my troubles much better than the silly songs they sing nowadays. Please, have them sing just one verse.	Give me some music. (music plays) Now, good morrow, friends. Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song, That old and antique song we heard last night. Methought it did relieve my passion much, More than light airs and recollected terms Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times: Come, but one verse.
Sir, the person who should sing that song isnt here.	He is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing it.
Who was it?	Who was it?
Feste, the jester, my lord. Olivias father used to like him. Hes somewhere else in the house.	Feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady Olivias fathertook much delight in. He is about the house.
Then go find him. Meanwhile, play the tune.	Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
	In the sweet pangs of it remember me; For such as I am, all true lovers are, Unstaid and skittish in all motions else Save in the constant image of the creature That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?
It really makes you feel what a lover feels.	It gives a very echo to the seat Where Love is throned.
Come along with us, Signor Fabian.	Come thy ways, Signior Fabian.
Im coming, dont worry. If I miss this, let me be boiled alive.	Nay, Ill come. If I lose a scruple of this sport, let me beboiled to death with melancholy.
Wont you be glad to see that rascal dog humiliated?	Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascallysheep-biter come by some notable shame?
Ill be thrilled. You know, he got me in trouble with the lady of the house once when I arranged a bear-baiting here.	I would exult, man. You know, he brought me out o' favorwith my lady about a bear-baiting here.
Well have another bear-baiting just to make him angry, and well mock him till hes black and blue. Wont we, Sir Andrew?	To anger him, well have the bear again, and we will foolhim black and blue. Shall we not, Sir Andrew?
If we dont, itll be the biggest disappointment of our lives.	An we do not, it is pity of our lives.
Here comes the little villain herself.	Here comes the little villain.
	
Hide behind the boxwood hedge, all three of you. Malvolios coming down the path. Hes been over there practicing how to act for the past half hour. Watch him carefully if you want to have some fun, guys. This letters going to turn him into a starry-eyed idiot. Now hide, for Gods sake!	Get you all three into the boxtree. Malvolios coming downthis walk. He has been yonder i' the sun practising behaviorto his own shadow this half hour. Observe him, for the loveof mockery, for I know this letter will make a contemplativeidiot of him. Close, in the name of jesting!
God bless you, my friend, and your music too. Do you make your living by playing that drum?	Save thee, friend, and thy music. Dost thou live by thytabour?
No, sir, I live by the church.	No, sir, I live by the church.
Oh, youre a clergyman?	Art thou a churchman?
No, I live by the church because I live in a house, and my house is by the church.	No such matter, sir. I do live by the church; for I do live atmy house, and my house doth stand by the church.
You could just as easily say that a king sleeps near a beggar if the beggar lives near him, or that the church is supported by your drum because it stands by your drum.	So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar if a beggar dwellnear him, or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy taborstand by the church.
Youre right, sir. What a wonderful time to be alive! Sentences can be turned inside out so easily nowadays!	You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is but acheveril glove to a good wit. How quickly the wrong sidemay be turned outward!
Thats true. People who fool around with words too much can make words act like whoreschanging all the time, and immoral too.	Nay, thats certain. They that dally nicely with words mayquickly make them wanton.
Thats why I wish my sister didnt have a name, sir.	I would therefore my sister had no name, sir.
Why, man?	Why, man?
No, I wont stay a second longer.	No, faith, Ill not stay a jot longer.
Why are you leaving, my angry friend?	Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
Yes, you have to tell us why, Sir Andrew.	You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
Well, because I saw your niece Olivia treat the counts messenger better than shes ever treated me. I saw it in the orchard.	Marry, I saw your niece do more favors to the Countsservingman than ever she bestowed upon me. I saw t i' theorchard.
Did she see you there the whole time, old boy? Tell me that.	Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.
Yes, she saw me quite clearly.	As plain as I see you now.
Well, that proves shes in love with you.	This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
Are you trying to make fun of me?	'Slight, will you make an ass o' me?
No, Ill prove it with airtight evidence and logical argument.	I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgmentand reason.
And you cant deny evidence and argumentTheyve been around since Noahs ark.	And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah wasa sailor.
She flirted with the messenger boy to exasperate you, fire up your passions, and make you angry and jealous. You should have run up to her, unleashed a few excellent quips invented on the spot, and rendered the young man speechless.	She did show favor to the youth in your sight only toexasperate you, to awake your dormouse valor, to put fire inyour heart and brimstone in your liver. You should thenhave accosted her, and with some excellent jests, fire-newfrom the mint, you should have banged the youth intodumbness.
I really didnt want to inconvenience you. But since you seem to enjoy helping me, I wont nag you to stop any more.	I would not by my will have troubled you, But, since you make your pleasure of your pains, I will no further chide you.
I couldnt stay behind after you left. I just felt a sharp desire to follow you. It wasnt just that I wanted to see you, though I very much did want that. I was also worried about what might happen to you while you were traveling, since youre not familiar with this area, and its rough and unwelcoming to a stranger with no guide. I followed you because I love you and I was worried about you.	I could not stay behind you. My desire, More sharp than fild steel, did spur me forth. And not all love to see you, though so much As might have drawn one to a longer voyage, But jealousy what might befall your travel, Being skilless in these parts, which to a stranger, Unguided and unfriended, often prove Rough and unhospitable. My willing love, The rather by these arguments of fear, Set forth in your pursuit.
My friend Antonio, all I can say is thank you. I know words are cheap. If I had any money Id back up my gratitude with cash. Anyway, what should we do? Should we go see the sights in the town?	My kind Antonio, I can no other answer make but thanks, And thanks, and ever thanks. And oft good turns Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay. But were my worth as is my conscience, firm, You should find better dealing. Whats to do? Shall we go see the relics of this town?
We can do that tomorrow, sir. First we should make sure you have somewhere to stay.	Tomorrow, sir. Best first go see your lodging.
Im not tired, and night is a long time away. Come on, lets go see the sights.	I am not weary, and tis long to night: I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes With the memorials and the things of fame That do renown this city.
Ive sent for him. He says hell come. What kind of food should I serve him? What presents should I give him? Its easier to buy young people than to beg or borrow them. Oh, Im talking too loud.Wheres Malvolio? Hes very serious, which is right for someone in mourning like me. Where is Malvolio?	I have sent after him. He says hell come. How shall I feast him? What bestow of him? For youth is bought more oft than begged or borrowd. I speak too loud. Wheres Malvolio? He is sad and civil And suits well for a servant with my fortunes. Where is Malvolio?
Hes coming, madam; but hes acting very strangely. He must be possessed by the devil.	Hes coming, madam; but in very strange manner. He issure possessed, madam.
Why, whats the matter with him? Is he talking nonsense?	Why, whats the matter? Does he rave?
No, he just smiles. You should have a guard nearby if he comes in here, because hes clearly disturbed.	No, madam, he does nothing but smile. Your ladyship werebest to have some guard about you if he come, for sure theman is tainted in s wits.
Ask him in here.	Go call him hither.
	If sad and merry madness equal be.
	
Hello, sweet lady.	Sweet lady, ho, ho.
Are you trying to tell me that I wasnt sent to get you?	Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?
Oh, who cares, youre acting like a fool. Leave me alone.	Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow. Let me be clear ofthee.
Good for you, holding out on me like this! No, I dont know you, and my lady didnt send me to get you, and Im not supposed to tell you to come speak with her, and your name is not Master Cesario, and this is not my nose, either. Nothing is what it is.	Well held out, i' faith. No, I do not know you, nor I am notsent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her, noryour name is not Master Cesario, nor this is not my noseneither. Nothing that is so is so.
Oh please, go somewhere else to blab your nonsense. You dont know me.	I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else. Thou knowst notme.
Blab my nonsense? He mustve heard that phrase describing some great man and now hes using it on a jester. Blab my nonsense! What an idiotic place this world is. Now please stop being so strange and tell me what exactly I should blab to my lady. Should I blab to her that youre coming?	Vent my folly? He has heard that word of some great manand now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly! I am afraid thisgreat lubber, the world, will prove a cockney. I prithee now,ungird thy strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to mylady. Shall I vent to her that thou art coming?
Please, fool, go away. Heres money for you. (giving him money) If you stay any longer, Ill give you something worse.	I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me. Theres money forthee. (giving money) If you tarry longer, I shall give worsepayment.
Well, well. Youre a generous man. Wise men who give fools money might get a good reputationif they keep up regular payments for fourteen years.	By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men thatgive fools money get themselves a good reportafterfourteen years' purchase.
No, Im telling you, put on this robe and beard. Make him think youre Sir Topas the priest. Be quick. Meanwhile, Ill get Sir Toby.	Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard. Make himbelieve thou art Sir Topas the curate. Do it quickly. Ill callSir Toby the whilst.
Well, Ill put it on and disguise myself. I wish I were the first person who ever told lies in a priests robe.	Well, Ill put it on, and I will dissemble myself in t, and Iwould I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown.
	
God bless you, Mr. Priest.	Jove bless thee, master Parson.
Bonos diesThe fool is saying hello in an imitation of Latin.Bonos dies, Sir Toby. As the old hermit of Prague, who couldnt read or write, said very wittily to a niece of King Gorboduc, Whatever is, is. So since Im Mr. Priest, Im Mr. Priest. Because isnt that that, and isnt is is?	Bonos dies, Sir Toby. For, as the old hermit of Prague, thatnever saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a niece of KingGorboduc, That that is is. So I, being Master Parson, amMaster Parson. For, what is that but that, and is butis?
Go to him, Sir Topas.	To him, Sir Topas.
This is the air, thats the glorious sun. I can feel and see this pearl she gave me. I may be dazed and confused, but Im not insane. Wheres Antonio, then? I didnt find him at the Elephant. But hed been there before me, and they told me hed gone out looking for me. I could really use his advice right now. I feel sure this situation is due to some mistake, and I dont think Im crazy. But this sudden flood of good luck is so unbelievable that Im ready to distrust my own eyes and my own rational mind when they tell me Im not insanemaybe the ladys insane. But if that were the case, she wouldnt be able to run her house, command her servants, listen to reports, make decisions, and take care of business as smoothly as she does. Theres something going on thats not what it seems. But here she comes.	This is the air, that is the glorious sun. This pearl she gave me, I do feel t and see t, And though tis wonder that enwraps me thus, Yet tis not madness. Wheres Antonio, then? I could not find him at the Elephant. Yet there he was, and there I found this credit, That he did range the town to seek me out. His counsel now might do me golden service. For though my soul disputes well with my sense That this may be some error, but no madness, Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune So far exceed all instance, all discourse, That I am ready to distrust mine eyes And wrangle with my reason that persuades me To any other trust but that I am mad Or else the ladys mad. Yet if twere so, She could not sway her house, command her followers, Take and give back affairs and their dispatch With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing As I perceive she does. Theres something in t That is deceivable. But here the lady comes.
If youre my friend, youll let me see his letter.	Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.
Dear Mr. Fabian, do me another favor first.	Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
Anything.	Anything.
Dont ask to see this letter.	Do not desire to see this letter.
Thats like giving someone a dog as a present, and then asking for the dog back in return.	This is, to give a dog and in recompense desire my dogagain.
My friends, are you all Lady Olivias servants?	Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
Yes, sir, were part of her entourage.	Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.
I know you. How are you, my friend?	I know thee well. How dost thou, my good fellow?
Im better off because of my enemies, and worse off because of my friends.	Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for myfriends.
You mean it the other way around. Youre better off because of your friends.	Just the contrary. The better for thy friends.
No, sir, worse off.	No, sir, the worse.
How can that be? 	How can that be? 
